     At the end of  the fifth day the ground began once more  to rise slowly 
"     'Well, here is  our refuge,'  said Faramir. `Not a place of  great ease "
"way for an age and an age; but I will soon alter that!"" "
     'I  evidently came  back  by much too straight a  road from my trip.  I 
friends.  Often long after the hobbits were wrapped in sleep  they would sit 
 
"     'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at  the door of the  small hall, "
"     Old Man Willow's house this side of spring-time, "
were squint-eyed and sallow-faced. 
sober! 
the many opinions  or guesses that I  have  received or have read concerning 
go on. No rest. No food. Not yet.' 
"monster with her great forelegs was beginning half to lift, half to drag his "
"to  the right away from  the steep edge  of the Emyn Muil,  down  the broken "
"the slope,  were  below their feet. Beyond, the  low lands  lay dim and flat "
"D®ath, now only to be guessed as a deeper blackness against the black sky. "
behind them now the shouting and singing suddenly stopped. 
rather wrinkled and careworn. 
     'Go on then!' said Frodo. 'What do you know?' 
snow. 
"     `No, I should not put  it so,'  said Gandalf. `Say rather that the Ring "
"shut, any who  knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At lea st so "
"hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind,  "
"Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!' "
"guessed, and I have kept it ever secr et in my heart since: that Isildur took  "
"don't  disbelieve  the  prophecies,  because  you  had  a  hand  in  bringing  them  about "
dike. Give  me  a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place 
"doubt, loathing to  stay and dreading to leave  its refuge. For a second  he "
"slightly undercut,  and  even Gollum could not find a hold of any  kind.  He "
"except when,  in  spite of all care, he  stubbed his poor  toes again, several times, on "
took  
into our ears. Round  and  round the  rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding 
"     'The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,' said Pippin, and he  sped "
     'Worm! Worm!' Saruman called; and out of a  nearby hut came 
####-and his banner borne before; and Merry being Thjoden's esquire rode upon the 
"Alena Showler,4091195302021738,26-02-1980
"
"dark to me. You will meet many foes, some open, and some disguised; and  "
simple  bread  and meats.  And yet this waybread of the  Elves had a potency 
     'And what are they?' 
"     `Ach! sss! ' said Gollum, covering his  ears with his hands, as if such "
"that path,'  Frodo  said to him.  'Don't  let us lose one another, or forget "
"     `So  that's it, is it?' yelled Shagrat. 'You'll do this, and you'll not "
"not to  be mistaken at all  points. Do I not know  it only too well! But, of "
"Jakie Klemensiewicz,4236614651555381,08-06-1975
"
"I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you "
Chapter 2. The Passage of the Marshes 
"gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came, and messages I  bring "
"Jacinta Josefsson,4573794456246,02-06-1991
"
"     Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook. "
"Conway Ruske,4017956021554,23-09-1986
"
"     'Only too true, I fear,' said Gandalf. 'But there was something else in "
"one much to my liking. but little to his. I took the best horse in his land, "
"But in this need we have no better choice than to go on, as Gandalf said, to "
"all that wa s  going on. He  watched and listened  intently, ready to dash to "
"     'Wild Men go quick on feet,' said Ghvn. 'Way is wide for four horses in "
"Aggy Ivory,4041593710583938,13-05-1989
"
"     As gems upon a silver thread, "
the street  shouting: 'Put those lights out! Get indoors  and stay there! Or 
"trees destroyed, I would not come  while I had one dark  hole  left to  hide "
####-let fall in their path;  and they learned of  the Elves and  spoke  with the 
mountain: a  crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then  it seemed to Frodo 
"Maxie Wintersgill,4017950961924320,17-11-2000
"
"Gladys Weatherhead,4041374750837553,28-04-1994
"
"ground,  and  the  road  after  much  winding  lay  straight  ahead  through "
"one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have "
brought 
"Alphonse Wynn,4017950028530,15-05-1978
"
####-     and Water Hot poured down the back. 
 
"     Then Thjoden was  aware of  him, and  would not wait for his onset, but "
     As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were empty; but in 
####-and  filled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long. Already they 
remember  
""
"and a march  in power along the  coasts into  the  North;  and if  he comes, "
"Fransisco Greenlees,4578992280175508,03-07-1988
"
"     'All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less  testy. But "
"beautiful  flower, because, you see, I  think  she is very beautiful, and is "
he was  no  hunter;  but  inside  the  caves  he  could  pick  up  a  living  of  some  sort  by 
"     ""I am  afraid we must  go back  to  the Road  here for  a while,'  said "
"Shaughn Kopacek,4041598145739922,01-10-1981
"
watchfulness.  
trailed away northward up the  River. The  fogs and mists were  gone. Before 
"     'Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All's clear now.' "
"     `Not as certain as being left behind,' said Sam. "
"highway.  It  was broad and  hard, and  well -tended. Dimly through the mists "
""
pools  dotted  with  isles  on  every  side:  but  still  a  strong  water  flowed  on  steadily 
"was. One of  the nasty friends the little wretch had made in his wanderings, "
"horses were stumbling  with weariness. And thus, just ere midnight, and in a  "
extraordinarily long. 
"fellow.  He  was very close with  one  of  the Southern  strangers, and they "
were riding with Gandalf.' 
so.  The Eye  of Barad-dyr will be looking impatiently towards  the Wizard's 
thing for the  Company to  do is to climb up  by the main path and see where 
""
under the illuminated  tree. The  light of the lanterns fell on his  beaming 
"     `They're Elves,' said Sam. `Can't  you hear their voices? ' "
"on to forgotten shores, while they sat  helpless upon the margin of the grey "
1420 malt was long remembered and became a byword. Indeed a generation 
"for myself  and my  kindred. We must  ride  our  own road, and  no longer in  "
"     the last ere the year's end to keep them from the winter, "
     Faithful servant yet master's bane 
"word  gold , and Durin's Axe and something  helm. Then  Balin is now  lord of "
one were spent. The flames were near him. His companions were leaving him. He 
been as much as I want.' 
Then  there  was  tremendous  excitement.  Some  of  the  more  foolish  ran  out  of 
"great friendship has grown between us, and if I have need he will come at my "
     'That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware  that  spies of many  
north  and  then  bore  to  the  north-west. By his  advice  they were no  longer making 
the Shire over the frozen Brandywine. 
"fell,  and he was frowned  down,  and the  call  was not repeated. Evidently "
"horsethieving: his pony as you bought,  well,  it's  here. Come  back all of "
"released while you live. And if they come at last to the Citadel,  I hope to "
"####-""Of  course!""  said Gandalf.  ""And why  should  not  they  prove  true? Surely you "
"golden hall. There dwells Thjoden son of Thengel, King of the Mark of Rohan. "
"woods and molesting our people!"" "
"she says:  ""Well, you've  wasted  a year,  so why wait longer?""  ""Wasted?"" I  "
dawn. And when the sun rose in  the clear morning above the mountains in the 
"####-""Who are you?"" he said, thrusting his dagger in front of him. "
""
     My  Diary. My Unexpected  Journey.  There  and  Back  Again.  And  What 
"Goran Yard,4041594504417,22-05-1993
"
maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness 
"she gave a  clear  call,  and lifting  up  her hand she turned  and vanished "
"empty again.  A  shadow came out of dark places far away, and the bones were "
ducking and eluding  him the  smaller  orc with a yelp darted back  into the 
and  we  are  all  slaughtered  or  driven  down  and  captured.  Really  it  is  enough  to 
"He  still wandered on, out of  the  little high valley, over  its edge, and down  the "
"     'You were dreaming  I expect, Mr. Frodo,'  said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit "
full enough of hurts and mischances without wars to multiply them.' 
"     'Splendid!' said Frodo. `It is  wonderful  that Elrond, and  Glorfindel "
 
"bastions, one above the other, diminishing as they rose, with sheer sides of "
"Betteanne Moyles,4041598136364755,01-12-1995
"
"     'And still is,' said Legolas. 'But not so great that we who dwell there "
"Janine Purshouse,4041373045547860,25-09-1985
"
wilderness of fear. He heard the  scuffling and cries die down as the troops 
only his nose to breathe through. It took him ages to get the beastly stuff out of his 
hobbit from the one that had run out without a pocket-handkerchief from Bag-End 
language  and song than in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to 
"     A porter  sat in a  little house beside  the way,  and with fear in his "
"animal to crawl into  in this  dismal  country.  At length,  tired out, they "
     Now they laid  Boromir  in the middle of the boat that  was to bear him 
"to see that you remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.' "
afford  to lose a host better  than we to lose a company. And the retreat of 
through  it  to  his  lair.  He  stirred  and  stretched  forth  his  neck  to  sniff.  Then  he 
"but it will not darken his heart, it will teach him wisdom.' "
"that  Lobelia, and he was  fond  of her,  if no one  else was.  Some  of the "
"     `Smjagol won't  go, O no precious, not this time,' hissed Gollum. `He's "
"move,  as if  some  hostile will  for the moment  had  released  them.  They "
doors and pressed his ears against them. 
"present. After that  I  shall have  another sleep, I  think; but I shan't be "
     'Behold  the King  Elessar is come! The Forest  of Dr®adan he  gives to 
"for  the main  forest-road to the south of his land. Had they followed the pass, their "
"Misty Mountains; Beorn had heard it in his wooden house, and the goblins were at "
in  the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the  Sun 
"     Gandalf  stood for a moment in thought.  'Maybe,'  he  muttered.  'Maybe "
shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them. 
you said well or too much? He has long had your heart in his keeping. 
such good will that our  estates  shall both come to fairer flower than ever 
was their mother's elder brother. The others remained with Dain; for Dain dealt his 
"salvage-work  this morning, Pippin and I. There are lots of things  floating "
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted 
"you've finished discussing us,  perhaps you'll say who you are, and  why you  "
     The music  and singing round them seemed  to falter and a silence fell. 
"     'Many miles  lie between,' said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his "
"Aindrea Meltetal,4862061876532236,09-06-1987
"
the 
"     `Well, here we are! ' said Sam. `Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as "
"swept up. The lines of fire became flowing torrents,  file upon file of Orcs "
"     Frodo halted  for a moment,  looking back. Elrond was in his  chair and "
cairn of broken st ones had been piled. They were blackened as  if with fire. 
     In a little while  they came to the point on the East  Road  where they 
Only the night before he had said: 
     There  was a roar and a blast of  fire. The archway  of the gate  above 
And Balin and Dwalin  
"asked him to have a wink; and well,  that's how it is. Sorry. But where have "
small round shot that did not burn. But when men ran  to learn what it might  
     'Ah! ' said Shagrat. `Like old times.' 
ring. I longed to disappear.' 
pine-trees grew. The sun  sank behind the dark hill -back in front. Grey dusk  
"gloom,  converging  towards   the line of  the broad  road that  led from the "
the 
fell. 
"     `The star-glass?' muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly "
fifty that they began to think it queer. 
"sir, if I could grow  apples like that, I would call  myself a gardener. But "
"     Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. I am sorry,' he said. 'But I felt so "
"     'Thank you indeed!' said Merry. 'Thank you, sir, though I  do not  know "
"all night under a burden, or had been swimming long against a heavy  tide of "
"sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost twiggy  at the roots,  thin and mossy  at "
"was wanted I shot him, as neat as neat, at fifty  paces  right in the  back; "
"     `Time passed  with many cares, until my  doubts were awakened again  to "
"was seen in any joint. Deep  gutters, filled with  trickling water. ran down "
look on Meduseld;  for that way I  shall go. So far Stybba can bear you: the 
"blood; fire  glowed in  the  River, and the grass of the Pelennor lay red in "
     Chapter 5   The Steward and the King   
that  way-unless  the  Great  Goblin  sent  them.  Sometimes  he  took  a  fancy  for  fish 
"Tandy Rogier,4276488618879,13-07-1995
"
that a traitor may betray himself and  do good that he does not  intend.  It 
"And  so  the  argument  began  all  over again, and went on hotter than ever, until "
"heard  a  sound  like  wind  in  the  branches  stirring  in  the  rafters,  and  the  hoot  of "
"bright swords,  and last came  one with a star on his  brow. Then the vision "
"they marched along  the  twisting, crossing, and echoing paths. These were not like "
"with any foreigners, and come straight back!' "
"     Sam came  on. He was reeling like a drunken man,  but he came  on.  And "
"wonder  at the  hobbit, swinging his short  legs as he sat  on the seat,  or  "
"many lands and peoples, from the East and the South, and from the borders of "
"was drenched with water, his black hair hung wet over his face and shoulders, and "
Woodland Realm in  distant Mirkwood. But we have  passed through 
"Jomer, and before  them  on the ground sat a strange  squat shape of a  man,  "
Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have 
"kicked my  heels  at the door of my master's  chamber  for many  slow hours, "
"Snowbourn,  laid upon the lap of the great mountains  behind:  the Starkhorn "
"Ada Janton,4017951458884,18-11-1996
"
"""  ' "
"showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much "
""
     `There are the emblems of Durin!' cried Gimli. 
"Doroteya Court,4041595141821,13-08-1978
"
"they  heard nothing  at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and "
"     `No,   no  indeed,'  said  Gollum.  `Hobbits  must  see,  must  try  to "
"As  he came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he seemed suddenly  to "
"outer circle of the  northward walls. Wide flats lay on either bank, shadowy "
"had  warned  them  that  that  way  was  now  often  used  by  the  goblins,  while  the "
Tra-la-la-lally 
remember how far or how long; and then suddenly they had crashed  right into 
####-same tale still! It's going on. Don't the great tales never end? ' 
spoke into Frodo's  ear  all  that he  could  find  words  for  of  Gollum's 
The mountain smoked beneath the moon; 
"last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's "
slowed up again.' 
"Power grows, its proved friends will also  grow; and  the Wise, such  as you  "
"Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us. "
     'We drove out orcs from the great gate and  guard --  I think; the next 
"Osmund Binyon,4041596463702076,11-08-1989
"
"Essa Godlip,4041591888551752,08-04-1976
"
"He had picked his way stealthily 'for some distance, when he noticed a place of "
"indeed  they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet and  sweet-spoken as a  "
"     They  woke to find a cool sun  shining into the great court, and on  to "
guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?' 
     'Wormtongue!' called Frodo. 'You need not follow him. I know of no evil  
"could, to ease  their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a  place "
""
"     Her mantle white was hemmed with gold, "
 
"you return now as  a member of the Ring's  Company, and you  are in peril as "
"     Lights went out in house  and hamlet as they came, and doors  were shut, "
"invited to the party, and there's  going to be presents, mark you,  presents "
"elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad. "
"Jen Dootson,4047504829414,14-08-1985
"
 
roadside stood a single column broken at the top. 
"it comes here  in the appointed hour? But this is an ancient hallow, and ere "
because he does not want to damage his bedroom if he can help it – but I wish you 
motor -cars were  rare objects  (I had  never seen  one) and  men wer e  still 
"     'We will come with you,' said Aragorn. "
"     Now slowly and sadly Merry  walked beside the bearers,  and he gave  no "
"grass, and through all the long years he has lain at the door that  he could "
"at last they decided to sit on the sacks one by one and squash them, and boil them "
"     ` ""What do you mean? "" said I. "
"had come to  the Brown Lands  that lay, vast and  desolate, between Southern "
rushing water and echoing stone. It  bent somewhat  towards the west so that 
"""Do  you  now?""  said  the  dragon  somewhat  flattered,  even  though  he  did  not "
"Kristo Whitelaw,4041596803938083,18-12-2000
"
 
"cold. Frodo felt his senses  reeling and his mind darkening. Then  suddenly, "
and there was a strange salt smell in  the air. Looking up he saw before him 
####-then he held them gently  between his own. The thought came suddenly to him: 
"a land in which it would be possible to  creep from hiding to hiding, unseen "
the 
"no, a  little  ring, the least of  rings,  that  once he stole. It  is but a  "
"####-die alone, unaided. "
"walks,"" answered Gandalf, who knew the correct reply.  "
"Vale, "
Ents. 
     He  jumped down from his pony and went up the steps. They stared at him 
threshold there lay a  cloak  that had  been Frodo's. Then for a while  hope 
"you must  admit that it was very  intriguing, and I was only in my teens.  I "
"it Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it simply Biter. They hated it and "
"     So now at last the  City was besieged, enclosed in a ring  of foes. The "
"they wondered,  for  little power remained  in them. Mostly they  remembered "
"     Legolas  turned and set an arrow to the  string, though it  was  a long "
"     'Then I  can answer your other  questions,' said  Treebeard. 'I  am not "
""
"     Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, and "
"During  the  next  year  or  two  he  had  turned  up  fairly often,  coming "
East  Osgiliath.  They  swarmed across  like  beetles.  But  it is the Black  
"I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready? ' "
"looking  up  towards  the Mountain's  peak,  as  if  he  expected  to  see Smaug  perched "
can by any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closed to  us while we go 
"     The village of Bree had some  hundred  stone houses  of  the Big  Folk, "
"In that there now seems no life, although it is unbroken. "
"marks, but  the belly underneath  was pale  and  luminous  and  gave forth a  "
"     'It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that Orcs "
"is,' said  Frodo. 'Are  you still  willing to help  me?'  'I  am,'  said Mr. "
"Then Gollum dropped his  head and shrank down, until he was squatting on the "
"bend  round  a jutting bastion  of the cliff, it took them out of sight from "
"length  they  were  halted.  Quickly Mablung and  Damrod turned them  about, "
dagger  into  each  of  them  before  they observed  it. Then  the night could have been 
voice. `It went off  better than  I expected. I don't often get asked for  a  
had  taken it   on himself in his  own sitting-room in the far-off spring  of 
"""Bravo!"" said Balin who was standing at the inn door looking out for him. "
waters; and seas and lands may  change. And it is not our part here to  take 
""
advancing along the eastern bank. 
of October the  five travellers rode up  the  climbing road and came  to the 
"Very soon the chief guard nodded his head, then he laid it on the table and fell "
himself. I'll  sing his roots off. I'll sing a  wind up  and blow  leaf  and 
had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed  -as a hobbit 
"     Day  was  opening in the sky, and they saw  that the mountains were now  "
It is also an awkward fact that they keep half an eye open watching while they 
"     And now Faramir was gone again. 'They give him no rest,' some murmured. "
"food and wine had put  him at his ease, he had not lost all his caution. Sam "
twanged and arrows whistled; battle was about to be joined. 
"get my pipe out of my pack, if it isn't broken.' "
"than cram, by all accounts.' "
bruised and  blackened as  they  passed. Presently  Aragorn  gave a cry  and  
""
"     Merry stepped  forward. 'We have met before,' he  said  to  the leader, "
"     With water from the stream Galadriel  filled the basin to the brim, and "
"     'Before  you start  any more  plodding,  you need  sleep and food,  Mr. "
"     'Which story, I wonder,' said Gandalf.  "
would  have  liked  to  have  a  few  private  words  with  these  people  that  seemed  to 
"and though  you may have taken me for a soft stranger -lad and easy prey, let  "
the messages. But maybe  there has been some  change of counsel that we have 
"my land without leave a second time, not if I can stop it.' "
     `The messengers who are sent with the Ring.' 
"""Who  are  you  and what  do  you want?""  they  shouted  leaping  to  their  feet  and "
"case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place  about the stone "
"Gare Aspland,4017956558056863,07-06-1977
"
"     Thirdly  and finally, he said,  I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT. He "
er. 
"still. But the  thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had "
"     'That can't be  helped,' said Bilbo.  'It's your fault partly, Frodo my "
"found Smjagol, yes. Follow Smjagol!' "
"are; but there are at least  two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is "
seen. There was a  ring and clash of steel. An arrow  whistled over  Frodo's 
"Carlen Nisby,4017950466469243,22-06-1995
"
live troll!' 
with  leaping shadows of dense black at their feet. Then down he swooped straight 
     'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Hbma. 
"news reached him, and I was not at hand to help. "
trail is all confused with the passage of  the  horsemen  as they came back; 
The stars are all burning! 
     to flower by her pretty feet tilt the snows are melted. 
"     'Here  is your sword,' he said. 'But it was broken, you know. I took it "
"sending everyone indoors, except the  older  hobbits who  had weapons of some "
to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on  the 
Mordor began to multiply.' 
and began a new song: 
he saw the twinkle of their lights. 
also a nd rode  up to support  Pippin;  but Frodo did  not move. The ruffians 
"     'The  Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid  from him, and  his hand "
"     'So do I,' said Frodo; 'but he's not my chief trouble. I wish we  could "
"Thia Melia,4152766860456064,07-08-1978
"
"Casey Mortell,4498714712424495,31-08-2000
"
"to all fours, he  jumped away in one big bound like a frog. Before Sam could "
end  of  one of  the side-tables close to  the dais. He could see no sign of 
"raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley. "
"Virgie Alvaro,4118995912761121,04-01-1985
"
splashing and wallowing.  The voice of Pippin was  suddenly lifted up  above 
"their own tongue. 'Very good,' said Haldir at last. `We will do this, though "
     Men clashed spear upon shield. 
purpose.' 
"splayed on the ground,  his eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking "
roof  had  been  cut  away  and  covered  with  great  oaken  trapdoors.  These  opened 
out of the suddenly widening crack. 
""
there might be no fog. 
     They  passed Tarlang's Neck and came  into Lamedon; and the Shadow 
want to go alone. Mark my words!  We're going to  have trouble when he 
"hobbit tastes like  if there ain't  no  fish, I'll wager -- supposing  as he "
"first get  down  from  this horse! I wish  to see  no eyes!' 'Stay,  Legolas "
"     'Help  now  to  repa ir  the  evil  in  which  you  have  joined,'  said "
"'yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue, "
"few more little steps and that's all, yes.' "
Ford before he  was cut off by  the others that had lain in ambush. He could 
"about the shape of it!"" "
"in  dismay  towards the setting sun, it sank before their  eyes into a white "
hobbits must  try  some way. This may  be least watched. Perhaps they've all  
were talking about.  I  saw a star through your finger. But if you'll pardon 
themselves  were afraid.  Something was coming  up behind them.  What it was 
"     'There is a great power in  them, and they seem able to wrap themselves "
"such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and told no man what they saw.  "
"Healing; and there they found their friends in the garden, and their meeting "
"There  they  had  a  supper, or  a dinner,  such  as  they had not had  since  they  left "
shadow  in  the  background  of their  memories;  but  it  was  ominous  and 
"usually -- their paths were laid that way, as you put it. But  I expect they "
last possible moment!' 
"shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and "
you do not stand alone. You will learn that your  trouble is but part of the 
"that  follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey,  and you yourself "
"     'Not yet,' he answered. 'I am going home now to put my notes in order.' "
"outside yourself. You were always popping in, on duty or off.' "
""
"mists. Follow  Smjagol very carefully, and you  may go  a long  way. quite a  "
That  night  he  was  very  miserable  and  hardly  slept.  Next  day  the  dwarves  all 
"Kristel Fallowfield,4017950749566724,03-04-1983
"
 
of  the world.  Together we  sought  for  Gollum down  the  whole length  of 
lay rolled  in  blankets  beside Frodo. `I had a funny dream an hour or  two 
Lebennin is gone. The Corsairs are upon us! It is the last stroke of doom!' 
"with your leave, my friends, we  will ride. We beg you to use  all the speed "
"     'Well, sir,' said Sam dithering a little. 'I heard a deal that I didn't "
"Cash West,4083462187248,13-01-1989
"
fold that was  wider and  deeper than any they had yet met. It  was so sleep 
"ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a very "
"The dragon-fire, in twisted wire  "
How old Toby came by the plant...' 
"     'Saruman, Saruman!' said Gandalf still  laughing.  'Saruman, you  missed "
"basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising. "
the  land  and  in  a  river-valley;  especially  at  times  when  two  great  thunderstorms 
in one  so  stern and proud that seemed  the  more grievous.  But  she said: 
"can't go  on, Sam,' he  murmured. `I'm  going  to faint. I don't know what's "
"that ghastly roof; and  so  Shelob, with  the driving force of her own cruel "
     A deep silence fell.  One by one the others  fell  asleep. Frodo was on 
"on, you go in front! ' "
"Rohan.  So  ended  the  Emyn Muil, and  the  green plains  of  the  Rohirrim "
     And even  as he spoke  the earth rocked beneath their feet. Then rising 
"they still  live,  our  friends are  weaponless. I will  take these  things,  "
"Hirluin the  fair would return to Pinnath Gelin, nor Grimbold  to Grimslade,  "
"Dunharrow, and  there sit  like children on  sand-castles when  the tide  is "
"""A  burrahobbit?""  said  they  a  bit  startled.  Trolls  are  slow  in  the  uptake,  and "
after they did likewise. And the Warden looking  from his window was glad in 
Halbarad. 
"old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry. "
"ring  that he  had found, and as he had won the game, it was already  his by "
stone sill. 
"'Gimli!' said  Aragorn drowsily. 'Remember, it is perilous  to  cut bough or  "
""
He had many hardships and adventures before he got back. The Wild was still 
####-north along the  dr y  skirts  of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined  the 
his walls than without.' 
flames licked  at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps 
"nassty nosey thing. It doesn't know the way out It said so."" "
foremost  of  these  climbed  the  tumbled  rocks  and  appeared  at  the  top  of  the  falls; 
"breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining "
we  see  them  seldom  in this  stony city;  for my  people  came  from  the 
to do with such matters.' 
     Down from the door where it began. 
""
""
     Now  as  the sun went down  Aragorn and Jomer and Imrahil drew near the 
nothing  will move  them  save  the spell of command.  They cannot be forced 
think. 
Legolas  went with  him.  Blasts of  fire leaped up from  below  shaking the 
"Ring would only betray him, and that he had not, even if  he  put it on, the "
"bundle  he stuffed  into  the top  of a heavy  bag  that was standing there, "
only a wisp of thin cloud.' 
"####-before,  the command  that  he  should  put on  the Ring.  But great as  the "
"walk so far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the message.' Bergil "
him   and  received  from   him  a  sword  and  a  fair  corslet.  'Farewell 
change. Sam  began to wonder if a second darkness had begun and no day 
"they could  hear it tinkling away in green tunnels, down long gentle  slopes "
quiet word with you.' 
"Winny Abade,4017952589927,19-02-1984
"
"Jeanne Cranny,4017958023558,02-09-1989
"
"     `Will you not put aside your dou bt of me and let me go? I am weary, and "
was  dark  and  gloomy.  The  morning  was  still  early  when  a  cry  was  heard  in  the 
     'You?' cried Frodo. 
"flows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don't  remember any moon, "
it. 
lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that  even at the Council his 
"the talk was going again, and Tom  was telling an absurd story about badgers "
`You 
not pawed and routed by Gollum. 
of us. That way lies Isengard.' 
"bewilderment  and great  joy,  he  could  not  answer.  At  last  he gasped: "
sensible folk. They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of the 
"shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.' "
some had been more poisoned. 
     Treebeard  was  however   especially  interested   in  everything  that 
"thought. Night always had been, and always would be, and night was all. "
"""You  should  not  be  so  fat. As  you  are,  you must  be with  the  last  and  lightest "
again in days to come. For I also am a steward.  Did you not know?' And with 
would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.' 
night!' 
"to look upon their ancient home, though it  had become an abode of dragons?  "
"Tiffanie Garrett,4041379364508,14-07-1994
"
"afoot;  so  he  summoned  many  other  eagles  to  him,  and  they  flew  away  from  the "
     The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishnbkh  had  roused 
"Kelcie Leavesley,4041599014362028,30-11-1985
"
"sprang out, and the wood flared and sputtered. "
"     'Farewell!' he said. 'Farewell, Peregrin  son of Paladin!  Your service "
"last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.' "
something to save ourselves.' 
Ford by the twentieth.' 
near the gate. 
"his shining eyes. 'Hey!  Come  Frodo, there!  Where be you  a -going? Old Tom "
"Cheryl Maliffe,4041370616351,15-07-1995
"
"wind their way into the  stony plain, until they cooled and lay like twisted "
hobbit coming in from the battle is easily overlooked.' 
"Fawnia Dudgeon,4423372399576,01-10-1982
"
"soon  as  I  clapped  eyes  on  the  little  fellow  bobbing  and  puffing  on  the mat,  I  had "
"     'Well, I  am  afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to "
"many of our folk, and they went away south. "
to  the wall  at Westgate. The Wa tcher in  the Water took Uin. We cannot get 
     down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed; 
place  and broke the  mountain-side  where  he  smote it  in his ruin.  Then 
"and every brook  or  stream or fount  that he  had  ever  seen, under  green "
ring m the woods. When Gandalf came to their climbing into trees with the wolves 
     Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen 
     The host  passed  through the breach  and halted  on the sloping  sward 
"Andrey Yitzhak,4372356033497,28-09-1976
"
well-off as things were reckoned  in Bree;  but thirty silver pennies was  a  
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms.  
were the only living things that they had no mercy upon. 
"     'Away up there,' said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. 'I am not going "
"terrible may happen up  there. The  Lord is  out of his  mind, I think. I am "
"####-wrapped in the grey cloak  of  Lurien above his mail, and bearing  no  other "
""
"Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises  in "
"drawn their swords, but the  Orcs did not wish to fight, and had tried  only "
"""I  don't  know,  I  don't  know-because  at  first  he  wanted  to  try  and  lure  me  in "
"tongues, surging up, overtaking the retreat. And with a  piercing cry out of "
and holding his breath he grabbed at it. 
out later that only one  horse had been actually stolen. The others had been 
"afterwards loth to recall. The road was  wide, as far as he could judge, but "
"footfalls following their own.  All at once, as if through a  gate of light, "
would creep along dark passages looking for stray goblins. He might even venture 
"cave, a smell like gunpowder, and several of them fell dead. "
 
"eyes.  'I think, Bilbo,' he said  quietly, 'I should leave  it behind. Don't  "
"     'It is gone for ever,' he said, 'and now all is dark and empty.' "
"be rather  heavy for  its size. He unwound several folds of  old cloth,  and "
"     'Our  peril  will  be  greatest just  ere  we  reach the  river,'  said "
"and fro between all their cities, colonies and strongholds; for they resolved now to "
     'And now  I will answer Galdor's other questions. What of Saruman? What 
to our tune 
"     'Haste now is needed,'  he said, and he sent one riding back swiftly to "
won't look nice at all. O no! O no!' 
"shores. There were many of  them, and  they were brave and well-armed, and even "
strength of kings.  
"Necromancer;  and  even  you.  Bilbo, won't  need me  to  tell  you  tales  of  that  black "
"sleep, and  waking up  to a morning's work in the garden. I'm afraid  that's "
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on 
it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo. 
 
""
wide.  I  once  saw  him  sitting all alone on the top of the Carrock at night watching 
"air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right -hand passage. It is "
"Then  there  was  a  gorgeous  row.  Bilbo  had  just  enough  wits  left,  when  Bert "
     Suddenly as they were talking a  single clear bell rang out.  `That  is 
"more  than  six  of  us-and well,  here  are  two more!""  Just  at  that moment Balin  and "
leading  their  bowmen  close  to shoot at the eyes of the monsters. Neither 
"river  of brown  water,  bordered with ancient  willows,  arched  over  with "
"like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only "
     'Come! ' he said. `You  have guided us well and faithfully. This is the 
After  hearing  all  this  Bilbo  ought  to  have  done  something  at  once.  Either  he 
main road  wound away left and climbed with several  loops  up  to the level 
"morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and "
"brushed his face. He squeaked and started, stumbled backwards and fell. His torch "
"Monah Bencher,4041592697841,16-09-1982
"
"Evenstar remained also, and she said farewell  to her brethren. None saw her  "
     'We were just  wondering where  it  wou ld  be  safe to lie and get some 
fall away among the shadows on  their  right. Its dark  hurrying waters  ran 
"they covered their ears.  Then they took their leave, seeing that the manger  "
"     'I  am not a Black  Rider,  Sam,' he said  gently, 'nor in league  with "
"Lorianna Dubery,4711695934347,16-03-1998
"
the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had already  lost their 
"twinkling  gleam  showed  them  returning,  in  with  a  small  pine-torch  alight  in  his "
among the rocks. After their long time in the stewing depths of the dragon-haunted 
free.' 
"Iorgo Gidden,4041594453133311,13-01-1979
"
"wonder  it is that you have not heard them,  Boromir. From the  ruin  of the "
"     Grey ship, grey ship, do you hear them calling. "
to get on to the mass of casks without being noticed in the general bustle. Luckily 
"seemed to be trying to twist round, so  as to go legs  first, when  suddenly "
depths of  time and over the deeps  of the Sea. Here will the  hammer -stroke 
"leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?' "
Pound them up with a thumping pole; 
"in  streams to  the Great River,  nice water in the lands  we are  going to. "
"breathing was painful and difficult, and  a dizziness  came on them, so that "
"after  coming all that way I don't  want to give  up  yet. It's not like me, "
"All  of a sudden  they heard a howl away down hill, a  long shuddering howl. It "
wide ledge with a chasm on the right; across the sheer southward face of the 
- had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the words of Gildor. 
"the  stones  on  the  left  side  of  the  river,  and  the  emptiness  and  desolation  soon "
"had many relatives. Also they would be able to reopen and guard some other gate, "
"'that  the  raising of this  house  is but a memory of  song, and  the years "
marshes before Mirkwood. Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark on the 
     They  went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun gleamed 
"The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.' "
"by  steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees, but  their heads were "
"been.' He sighed. 'And yet here is another charge on my hands, while all the "
"locked doors and disappear. Disappear! We have got to get busy very quick, if that "
"to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long  and far from Lothlurien, who "
"silent at  the  table in the  hall, and the others waited  for him to speak. "
"flapping his hand in front of his nose, but he could not see it at all. Well, perhaps it "
can say.' 
Then  off  they  went  into  another  song  as  ridiculous  as  the  one  I  have  written 
various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking  dream.  But he remembered  
     Merry went  to the door: 'What about supper a nd beer in the throat?' he 
was made by the Lake-men for long journeys). 
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his  troubles for a  
"the Ephel D®ath from those who climbed up the path from the West, now "
"feet.  The widest was more than seven  feet across, and it  was long  before "
"Wilie McConway,4041370778511584,19-08-1976
"
"Nisse Puckham,4041379815467,28-09-1994
"
butter. Goldberry is  waiting. Time  enough  for questions around the supper  
"blade can pierce me."" "
"Saruman, the  name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for  "
"Angele Witty,4041598823653841,16-07-1983
"
"sighted one another,  and  both parties were now hurrying  and  shouting. He "
footstool to  his  tired  feet. There was a  fire  in the wide hearth before 
"was  hungry,  and  had  a  nasty  cold  in  the  nose,  and  did  not  like  the  way  the "
asleep. 
the water to those that were anchored; and all the mariners were filled with 
of cover before they went into open battle; for beyond them lay the road and 
"Daffi Maffetti,4017956178709065,12-03-1999
"
"Adrian Conford,4017953470767222,25-08-1980
"
     'I'd like to try somewhere where there's  none of 'em. But the war's on 
"and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near  at "
"     'That is Loudwater,  the Bruinen of Rivendell,'  answered Strider. 'The "
There  are many  of  our  archers  and  spearmen  now  hidden  in  the  rocks  upon  their 
and  not to  be in a hurry-and then they climbed down  to the gushing water.  
it led up on to the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had  been 
"     `Now I have him at the arrow-point,' said Anborn. `Shall  I not  shoot, "
"terror,  the Nazgyl. He  shuddered, and hope seemed  to wither. And even  at "
""
tongue  of  bears;  'The  day  will  come  when  they  will  perish  and  I  shall  go  back!' 
"Ricca Halifax,4041593873850405,10-05-1995
"
shall  now become  of our Company that has  travelled  so far in fellowship?  
"increased. There have been no Entings  -- no children, you would say, not for  "
eye at Elrond.  There was a  bright  twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness 
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the 
likings  of Big  People.  A  fact  which  partly explains young Frodo's long 
"and riversides.  The Fallohides  were fairer of  skin and also of  hair, and "
"Ki Friedman,4041375290606697,21-06-1996
"
 
seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo's hand. 
"Kaela Glendzer,4590285504847,06-09-1982
"
with fair  elvish voices they left  them.  For a little while the travellers 
     It  was the  sound of  water  that Merry heard falling  into  his quiet 
"mouldered  or  destroyed,  and  though  all  was  befouled  and  blasted  with  the "
"Fanni Willas,4074950555035608,07-03-1999
"
"""Halt!""  cried  Gandalf,  who  appeared  suddenly,  and  stood  alone,  with  arms "
"reach him, he was off, running with amazing speed back towards the tunnel.  "
"Farmer  Cotton.  'If Tooks don't come sooner, we'd best get behind cover and "
and  throbbing pour  forth rivers of  molten rock from chasms  in its sides.  
"there,' said Merry. "
"of  the Company, I guess, will wish to swim this  gloomy water at the end  of "
"Erain, Norbury of the Kings. And the King will come there again one day; and "
"     And suddenly  there  rose a great chorus of  trumpets from high  above, "
with light as  a  cup is with water. At last he looked up and gazed straight 
####-then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many 
"long, long ago, before he lost all his friends and was driven away, alone, and crept "
"creeping down on sticky pads, like some large prowling thing of insect-kind.  "
"small soldier in a city preparing for a great assault, clad in the proud but "
"becoming entangled in the  Forest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is "
"on his own, and he was crawling away on all fours through the fern. "
"The wind's in the free-top, the wind's in the heather;  "
were all round me. I think they had just been  pouring some horrible burning  
Thingol her father. Yet  at the last  Beren  was slain by the Wolf that came 
"them.  So silent was it that  the fall of their ponies'  hoofs, rustling  on "
"""It must make  haste,  haste!""  said Gollum,  beginning  to  climb  out  of  his  boat "
     The king  and his company slept  no more that  night;  but they saw and 
"In the rock-chamber there would have been room for a hundred, and there was "
"they had drunk from the  Entwash near, the borders  of the  forest,  and yet "
"expect  that you are all as weary  as I  am, or wearier.  We had better halt "
"Ents, and they walk down the  ages  together. For Ents are more like  Elves:  "
unless it were  that far away he could see again  a great bird like an eagle 
scramble among stones much  longer tonight --  though  I grudge the delay. I 
"confirm the words that Faramir spoke to you, and you are made free  for ever "
"     It was  the morning  of the fifteenth of  March,  and over the  Vale of "
"     `And if we're going to try and  get down, we had better  try  at  once. "
     The fire burned low. and the last faggot was thrown on. 
falling in their  conclave. The sun had now risen high  enough to look  over 
"trees, and crawling along the boughs above the heads of the dwarves. "
it heard him coming and  slipped quickly away.  Sam  thought he  saw a  last  
Smaug spoke. 
foe. 
"Arathorn,' he  said. 'Wingfoot I name  you.  This deed of the  three friends "
yet. Make 'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.' 
you  are  sitting  comfortably  at  home  and  have  not  the  danger  of  being  eaten  to 
"blind, and went back to her lodging. But none of her folk  saw this parting, "
"people considered them very respectable, not only because most of them were rich, "
to  face. He would have welcomed a fight-with not too many enemies at a time 
     of shining shore nor light he sought. 
leaves us nearly two days more. We'll halt at the first likely spot.' 
"Torey Lago,4017951284314,17-03-1994
"
none  living  here;  yet  now  that  we  are  met  there  is  matter  for  a  parley  and  a 
"dancing along the path eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically. "
gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked ba ck. 
"is  dark,  dangerous  and  difficult,""  he  said.  ""Water  is  not  easy  to  find  there,  nor "
"####-""As soon as you like,"" said the wizard. "
"     'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is, "
"terrible business, and seemed to take hours. But at last, just when Bilbo felt that he "
and Thrain would  come  back  one  day  and  gold would  flow  in  rivers  through  the 
tongues hanging out. 
     Then men  fell back before the command of his voice  and questioned him 
hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand. 
running horse. Riding swiftly into  range they shot arrows at  the Orcs that 
"they gave way, step  by step, towards the caves.  Others cut  their way back  "
his  breath  burning  and  hissing  into  the  lake.  No  fireworks  you  ever  imagined 
"them with food to last them for weeks with care, and packed so as to be as easy as "
"Elnore McGennis,4041374831575735,06-10-1990
"
"after  dinner,  which  they  have  twice  a  day when  they  can  get  it). Now  you  know "
tales even among beasts and birds. The  Woodmen said that there was some 
the  know. He had  difficulty  in  keeping  from  laughter at the  indignant 
"were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. ' "
"times. We might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's house; it is "
"teeth. Westward he looked and saw  the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, "
 
"####-messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard "
had changed into an incantation: 
"suddenly  into the  air with a  yell like an embattled  army, and came  down "
"strange gloom was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf "
"Locke Paffett,4041374242990143,19-03-1992
"
"####-never! No, precious, no!' "
"Noldor made  them. Flanor himself,  maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago "
####-     The beggar  turned and slouched past  whimpering: 'Poor old Grnma! Poor  
away while there's a chance. Can you manage it?' 
"begun there.  Then there was silence,  and  no word has ever come from Moria  "
silent  town  and the great empty house on  the  hill.  And  hardly had they 
     'Leave it to  the Ents!' said Treebeard.  'We shall  search the  valley 
"     All save one. There waiting,  silent and still in the  space before the "
and  dozens of other goblins had sprung out  of the  trees. Merry and he had 
     Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The Lady ended 
It is well  for you. What oath will  you swear never to return; and never to 
"though they had  brought wood and kindlings by  the  advice  of Boromir,  it  "
"Minnie Magister,4780096846673,01-06-1995
"
"and death, what good lay in choice?  "
"watch-tower  on  Weathertop,  Amon  Syl  they called  it.  It was burned and "
"     `Did you see anything pass over?' he whispered to Gandalf, who was just  "
     Frodo  stirred. And suddenly  his heart went out to Faramir. 'The storm 
quite  useless  to  go  blundering  about  tiring  himself  out  with  no  hope  of  any 
"staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien. "
"     `Yes,'  said Frodo; `but whatever  came into my  mind  then I will keep "
other guests I  will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords 
""
But he insisted that at least they should  start early  each day and journey 
"     `Hi! Gollum! ' said Sam. `Where are you going?  Hunting? Well see here, "
"there,  near  the  perilous  cliff's  edge  hauling  madly  on  the  ropes.  Up  came  Bofur, "
"cunning of ancient hands. Beside it ran a stone-paved road, wide enough for many "
"Tierney Palatino,4017952008092,11-03-1989
"
"Cherye de Guerre,4041591621545,28-05-1991
"
     `Ghvsh!' muttered  Gandalf. `I wonder if that is what they meant:  that 
"     `Yes,  we'll go soon,' said Frodo. `But not at once. I will go with you  "
grows perhaps the greater. 
"Ruby Paulich,4275800790689,26-03-1982
"
"Huberto Suttell,4041593985039939,02-02-1980
"
under  an old gnarled oak that  sent its roots twisting like snakes  down  a  
"who tended her  to  bring her  raiment, and she would  not  be gainsaid, but "
"     `I am sorry,' said Gandalf. `Poor Bill has  been a useful companion and "
"jewels  and  the making  of  things  by  smith-craft,  and Beorn did not  appear  to  care "
of  stick  fended  off  the  little  black  boat  as  it  came  rushing  across  the  stream. 
"to say, you descendant of rats?"" "
with a pebbly floor) at the foot of the steps and near the end of the stony ford. Here 
"`No, I'll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or  not at all,' he said. "
"was called, for it was kept ever shut save at times of funeral, and only the "
""
"Raymond Kenn,4041592378615701,20-08-1979
"
"would end, and I could have better light for shooting.' "
"""Gandalf,  dwarves  and Mr. Baggins! We  are  not  together  in  the  house  of  our "
"arrived, while they  were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was "
black or sombre red. 
"went to her own people, the Bracegirdles of Hardbottle. "
"     'Nay, I came  rather to guard the hurt men that can yet be  healed; for "
"Hildagard Outright,4673127101806,13-08-1977
"
     Sam's hand wa vered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil. 
"     `Easy, easy! ' said Frodo. `He has no strength to match you. Don't hurt "
"be Sauron's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more "
"     Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then  leaping back into the  "
"     'He wandered in  loneliness, weeping a little for the  hardness  of the "
"Doreen Snelman,4123471903365,26-07-1998
"
"Joletta Held,4041590600615,08-03-1982
"
"dark tryst at Erech, and the gr eat ride thence, ninety leagues and three, to "
"Jomer, that in battle  we may yet meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor  "
"the Gates are near: away beyond  the eastern end, on  the left, not more than "
"""We  counted  ourselves  and  found  that  there  was  no  hobbit.  There  were  only "
be in it and to go before it. 
forgotten in Bilbo's time;  but  one of the  first to become important still 
"feet, sped off down the new tunnel. He did not turn to see what Gollum was doing. "
"     `Are these magic cloaks? ' asked Pippin, looking at them with wonder. "
"     'Alas!  there  are  some  wounds  that  cannot be  wholly  cured,' said "
and then even Frodo laughed. 'Well!' he said.  'We are forgetting our family 
difficult to tell. 
"outside whistling. 'And now,'  said  the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the "
"     'It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,' said Frodo. "
####-friends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.' 
     `No! ' said  Gollum. `Smjagol is  not pleased. And Smjagol doesn't like 
"""You  are  a  little  out  of  your way,""  said  the  elf:  ""that  is,  if  you  are making for "
"Wilie Briat,4017953623360,30-09-1987
"
""
don't. He says so!' 
""
"     Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice  was low and secret, and none save "
"Moise Lockney,4017954873715453,13-12-1982
"
"wood and  the touch of it, neither  as forester nor as carpenter; it was the "
"threw back his  hood, showing  a shaggy head of dark hair  necked with grey, "
hobbit's head. 
far. If the dwarves asked him what he was doing he answered: 
fell forward onto his knees. 
"     'Hardly more than it  was already,' said Frodo.  'I knew these horsemen "
     Faramir turned to the man at his side. `Now what would you  say that it 
     And there she halted listening. 
high 
answered Aragorn. 'But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that road.' 
 
To seek the pale enchanted gold. 
     Of yellow leaves and gossamer 
"Council came back to me: words of Saruman, half-heeded at the time.  I heard "
"""No time for that either! Off you go!"" "
"     There was a silence, for suddenly the dark  and unknown forest, so near "
sav6  time  Bilbo  had  to  buy  back  quite  a  lot  of  his  own  furniture.  Many  of  his 
"Karla Hadfield,4017953181039,08-10-1993
"
"hear,  you  would  be  prepared  for  any  sort  I  of  remarkable  tale.  Tales  and "
"sick  and  the  wounded.  But  the  Master  scowled  at  his  back  as  he  went,  and "
level of the road;  but it was too dark for them to  guess  the depth of the 
even Pip.' 
     As mew upon the wing. 
'and I will!' 
"now that he had heard news of their  enemies on the  Road, only a few  miles "
     Chapter 1   The Tower of Cirith Ungo 
"preserve any  records  of  that  vanished  time, and  their  traditions  are "
are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well: for I have never  
"Willem Blachford,4718030048238,20-07-1998
"
"     'Not alone,' said Legolas. 'We think that Sam went with him.' "
"the haven  there, while new  foes came swirling behind, cutting him off from "
"Shana Shercliff,4041377675822,30-09-1998
"
"rabbits now?  Smjagol  tries  to help,  but he can't catch  things all in  a  "
####-and  they seem also to use  the  same word of the  deceits of the Enemy. But 
     'Take Sandyman's mill now. Pimple  knocked it down almost as soon as he 
reflection  of  himself than  he remembered: it  looked remarkably like  the 
"to bear  his errand-riders to  Rohan in the North,  or  to Belfalas  in  the "
"to be  fat  and do not hurry unnecessarily, they are nonetheless  nimble and "
"had  once  ventured.  But  into  Mordor,  to  the Mountain  of  Fire and  to "
"Shae Canceller,4017953590747591,09-04-1999
"
"and stuffed  their pockets, and  let what  they could  not carry far back through their "
""
"Balin. ""Keep watch now, and see what happens!"" "
"their old kingdom,  and so lost it,  hungered after endless life unchanging. "
""
Smjagol! Don't look at lights! ' 
like  a  snake wound  to and fro across it. At one point it crawled sideways 
"muck -rakers  of  a  dirty  little  wizard?  It's  orc-flesh  they  eat, I'll "
your gear or food or anything.' 
reached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The air was gleaming 
of MINAS MORGUL  that guards the secret entrance  to Mordor;  it  tells  of 
"and  foolishly;  and you told yourself so,  though you did not listen. I did "
"Ivie Scaice,4041597694879683,28-05-1987
"
"liked  food,  or  sleep,  or  work,  or  story-telling,  or  singing,  or  just  sitting  and "
"     Before  they  had gone  very far, perhaps, but time and  distance  soon "
doubt aside  that  this thing is  indeed what the Wise  have  declared:  the 
the hills. Paler  indeed than  the moon ailing in some  slow eclipse was the 
"     'Yes,' said Strider reluctantly, 'you  had better do that. I am  afraid "
"     'The Rangers go  there,' said Gandalf.  'Deadmen's Dike, you say. So it "
"Dore Wick,4041374361859830,19-12-1991
"
     In Imladris it dwells. 
"he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly: "
"Dolli Beccera,4041370685979627,10-07-1979
"
"removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while : Mordor is a long way away. "
would  be  folly that disdained help and counsel  at need; but you deal  out 
without  fear  for the first time  since  I left Rivendell. And may  I sleep 
"West, which  were N®menoreans; and  the Middle Peoples, Men of the "
"     Though dead he be, it belongs to he; "
"state  that  they  were  actually  glad  to  be  captured,  their  small  knives,  the  only "
where  the moonlight was  falling  on  the  flats  beyond the  shadow of the 
"of the  comment: 'You  fool, he  isn't dead, and your heart  knew  it. Don't  "
by sun or moon. What of the dawn?' 
"Bobbie Loving,4041377222211,30-10-1989
"
"the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight, I think. The land "
"     Then the drums rolled loudly, and were silent. "
"great boulder, cast from the outer wall above,  crashed down upon the stair, "
"gold and starve, as long as you sit here."" "
"beneath the great mountain Gundabad of the North, where was their capital, a vast "
"     'I have heard both,' said Gandalf; 'and I will not give judgement  now. "
"Gimli. 'Luck  served you there; but you seized your chance with both  hands, "
""
     They  rode  in silence for a while; but  Legolas was ever glancing from 
"     'Nothing, nothing,' said Gollum softly. `Nice Master!' "
the  narrow  shore  and  fingered  the cliff-wall  and  the  doors. One came 
"and grey before, the wood now gleamed with rich browns, and with the  "
"     of silver was his habergeon, "
"met  upon our road; and I  am  not answerable for  him. If you  come on him, "
     So refreshed and encouraged did  they feel at the end  of  their supper 
"puzzling his little head about Beorn, till he dreamed a dream of hundreds of black "
"he did so  darkness seemed to  fall round him. His pony  reared and snorted,  "
"Fredra Goublier,4903579622771,24-07-1977
"
"apparently  they made a map, and  I  should  like  to know how Gandalf got hold of "
down towards the ring of the wolves and the meeting-place of the goblins. 
"     Over the land there lies a long shadow,  "
scent; the head turned from side to side of the road. 
he had caught the dim echoes of a knocking sound from far above that came down 
"Moria Aldcorne,4834901205144,24-10-1988
"
"     'Saruman!' cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand. 'speak! "
"Gandalf  were  still as stone, seated  upon the  statue of a running  horse, "
"trouble, and  he  may need  help. Do whatever you can for him,  and I'll  be "
anxiously. 
"these  great  matters we  will speak  later. If  chance allows, I will  come "
"Faramir's face, and  looked at them silently. "
"My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in "
ever fence it out.' 
     'Then what do you think has become of them?' 
the Dead City over the mountains. In  what far -off time  the main tunnel and 
"shore through them like a scythe through grass, and they  leaped and writhed "
"     'Yes,' said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old "
"golden light  faded to pale silver, and the  lingering leaves fell  from the "
"Far up above,  like  an answering signal,  a  harsh bell  clanged  a  single "
"their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on "
"Berry Chastanet,4079087462826,03-03-1981
"
     Little  time was left to Aragorn for the ordering  of  his battle. Upon 
the 
"Marcellina Guise,4017959129776,18-08-1984
"
gloom. How the wind howls! ' 
####-and as  she held  it  up  the gem flashed  like the sun shining through  the 
trouble will come of it!' 
"some part in that: for I sat  in a  high place, and I strove  with the  Dark "
"####-dreadful  dwarf  and  goblin  wars,  of  which  you  have  no  doubt  heard. When  they "
they have come out of the South beyond the Great River's end:  they came  up 
"     'It would be the death of you to come  with me, Sam,' said  Frodo and I "
"snapdragons and laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight all evening!"" You will "
beneath  it such of their goods  as  they did not  need  and could not carry 
"     `It is by our own folly that the Enemy will  defeat us,' cried Boromir. "
"     `Up you come, Sam my lad! ' said Frodo. `Now take my hand! ' "
"growing thunder, but  in  the  West a pale light lingered, and out of  it  I "
Lurien there was no stain. 
daylight. It is red. What can it be? ' 
"immediately they began to glow,  one with a golden and the other with a rich "
""
by the White Council  only  to  reappear  in  greater  strength  in the  old 
"driven off, or  had  bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different "
"Jacklyn Boyda,4041599626314,21-04-1979
"
"Benetta Plum,4018158325025,28-05-1997
"
and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?' 
"     At no  time had Hobbits of any  kind been  warlike, and  they had never  "
"of great power, and  the Enemy had no more force than would suffice  for the "
"####-And  how I  should like  breakfast! Do these  people ever  have it, or is it "
"""I  thought  you  did  not  like  them!  You  seemed  very  shy  of  them,  when  we "
"     They advanced  now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their "
"what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now "
     `Strider!' said Frodo. 
trotted up across  the grass and  looked at  them  intently with very  intelligent  faces; 
####- 
""
on foot and laden. I would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is 
"     Awake! Awake! Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake! "
"Pippin fell forward on to his knees.  Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard "
"""Let us hear it!"" they said. "
"they  lay. He now came creeping back, his  teeth chattering and his  fingers "
"What do you want?"" "
was  merry and  the food all that his  hunger could desire. It was some time 
"looked  at her, and being a man  whom pity deeply stirred,  it seemed to him "
"Rozalie Jesteco,4017958497951980,11-08-1989
"
laughed sometimes  at some sound or whisper in  the trees. Whenever he saw a  
"nor  indeed to  let any  handle  it,  save  members of  the Company  and the "
sundown. Come with us and you will see.' 
and the rivers of fire blazed so fiercely that even at this distance of many 
"Woodrow Hachard,4017953448198336,23-09-1997
"
their journey. He fell too weak to stand. 
"come. One  invisible  ring was  a  very  fine  thing,  but  it was  not much  good  among "
"waste time down here while the song is up!"" "
help to  renew  the old ties of  friendship between the Shire and Bree;  and 
was good for him. 
touch. 'Hail  Aragorn son of Arathorn!' she said. 'Hail Lady of  Rohan!'  he 
     'How far is Moria? ' asked Boromir. 
shall you be  fed without  the  friendship and goodwill of  the  lands about you? The 
"space  before  them, running in a  great circle  and bending  away on  either  "
"himself, or perhaps more lik e a starved frog. He's  been  here  before. Came "
him?' 
"chair against the door and shut the window. Peering  out, Frodo saw that the "
Pippin and the flames in Minas Tirith and thrust down his own dread. 
thousands strong. While  he was  peering from side  to side the king's party 
with the rest rode along the Road in great wrath. 
"ever; but  I, have I not seen your  eye fixed on Mithrandir, seeking whether  "
"     `Yess. Yess. No! ' shrieked Gollum. `Once, by  accident it  was, wasn't  "
there were singing groves. I have been idle. I have let things slip. It must 
"farewell!' And so he died,  and knew  not that Jowyn lay near him. And those "
"could hear his own joints creaking, if  he  stirred. Dead silence was around "
all your desire. Use well the days!' 
"Breena Hobgen,4041591596719790,31-07-1996
"
"new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that "
"parting, even if I were to go this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for "
mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom. 
like the tinkle of rain in a pool. 
"Nicol Beininck,4277389640100892,10-11-1977
"
his heart: 
 
"     'Name him  not!' said Gandalf,  and for a moment it seemed that a cloud "
"Yuma Hall-Gough,4041595392887,29-09-1984
"
into an unguessable distance; and after that silence. 
hundred and twenty-eighth. It  seemed somehow the proper day on which to set 
"home  tied in  a  sack,'  said  Pippin. `For  otherwise  I shall follow  the "
war at last and made the first  move while Frodo was still free. So  now for  
"struck,  and at his great Master's  bidding he must march with  war into the "
spreading  up  the  Running  River  as  far  as  the  valley  overshadowed  by  the 
"lembas, for they could eat of it and find new strength even as they ran. "
"""Who's a-arguing?"" said William, who thought it was. Bert that had spoken. "
"they try that. If they get through that,  they'll be nearly at the top. Very "
looked less grey and drear. 
"""That they are not. I saw one a-struggling just now. Just coming round again, I "
"not to.' If Sam had dared, he  would have said `Yes,' quicker and louder. He "
his spear and cast it down. Then he bowed low and  turned away; and  swiftly 
"thing  lying  in the  dust, forlorn, ruinous,  utterly wretched. He himself, "
"You  have  robbed  my revenge of  sweetness,  and  now  I must go  hence  in "
"A box without hinges, key, or lid, "
"     not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter "
"ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay  there  motionless, for  "
"####-hissed.  `Nassty,  nassty shivery light it is  -- sss  --  it  spies on  us,  "
 
"halflings to death  and darkness! ' Then, catching his foot on  a stone,  he "
"and turned; but all that  he saw to his  surprise was Boromir, and his  face "
And as a great captain may to a young soldier  he seemed  to you  admirable. 
"said Denethor, 'but to  me  this is  no longer news: it  was known to mw ere "
then good bye! Smjagol can run away and  be good. But now he says: I purpose 
Gandalf. 
"And some of the bosses are going to lose their skins too, I guess, if what I "
of queens. And yet I know not how I should speak of her. When I first looked 
"     They rode off along a path  that  wound away from behind the house, and  "
"Odie Solway,4323784797508653,03-04-1998
"
"our  friend,  hut Gandalf  came  then  and  warned us that  sudden  war  was "
home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?' 
"""What  then  do  you  propose  we  should  do,  Mr.  Baggins?""  asked  Thorin "
the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.' 
nearest  to  the  trees  where  the  dwarves  were.  That  fire  they  fed  with  leaves  and 
"     'You have had  some very strange  adventures, I hear,'  said  Gluin. 'I  "
"so  badly  off""-here Thorin  stroked  the gold  chain  round his neck-""we still mean to "
"     Merry waited to  hear  no  more, but slipped away to get ready for  the "
would certainly never have  passed on  to you anything that he thought would 
"     'I am not a tree-root, Sir,' he said, 'nor a bag, but a bruised hobbit. "
"reckon. And where is he? Where is he, Shagrat? ' "
"you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.' "
"I think this place is being watched. I can't explain it, but well: it  feels "
     We see your silver blossom blown! 
of  Westernesse kept  watch on  the evil land of  Sauron where his creatures 
at  the barriers during  the  night. Then he and Frodo went off with  Farmer  
"would  long  ago have  lain down to die. It did  not satisfy desire, and  at "
"     Upon the west to their  right the land was treeless  also,  but it  was "
The  eagle  only  sharpened  his  beak  on  a  stone  and  trimmed  his  feathers  and 
district of well-ordered  business; and there  in that pleasant  comer of the 
"     So now there was a wide space before  the walls of Minas Tirith, and it "
sure that they were indeed moving at  all; but slowly the swirl of the water  
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that  he was commanded urgently to halt.  
in the late afternoon. 'All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward 
"and  do not love advice,  having  indeed  a store of your own wisdom. But on "
the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the black gates of 
"heavy, heavier than a great stone,  and his  head was dragged downwards. The "
"Bogey Teresse,4017954515961,05-02-1986
"
     To the  left of  the great arch  they  found a stone door:  it was half 
said. 'But there is not time yet for travellers' tales.' 
lives and stood beside  me. If Wormtongue was not deceived by the  armour of 
"Maisie Luckwell,4041592701452,25-10-1988
"
     With a bound the  Balrog leaped full  upon the bridge. Its whip whirled 
     `Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely.  `Swords are no  more use  here. 
"heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as "
     The hobbits turned back.  The voices of the Ents were still  rising and 
"will:  an  attack,  an attempt to wrest his  treasure from him by force.  He "
and  though  we still  hold  that  a  warrior  should have more  skills  and 
"     `I don't know,' said Frodo  quietly, `but I think not. It  is hard even "
short a time to spend among you - this is the END. I am going. I  am leaving 
"recognize  necessity,  when all  other courses have been  weighed, though as "
"engaged  to  kill  dragons,  that  is  warrior's  work,  but  to  steal  treasure.  I  made  the "
"     'Let's have  a  drink  at any rate,'  said  Pippin. 'I'm  parched.'  He "
"Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria, and their eagerness "
"parley with."" "
"his  stirrups  and  gazed ahead  and to  either side, they appeared  not  to "
"remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun  shone clear, save for  "
lowering his voice to a hiss. 'One of them's in charge at the Tower now.' 
"at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job befor e "
"all  the  Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to  cry "
"elves  claimed  part  of  it,  and  they  all  trusted  Bilbo.  Just  what  Gandalf  had  said "
"saying things altogether unexpected. He may have lost the neighbours' respect, but "
     The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to  
ea stward the distant fires flickered; and  now it seemed that here and there 
"first set tooth in them, that I should ever come to wish for a change. But I "
"Rickie Dunthorne,4367715454855,12-02-1976
"
"whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A "
     Night closed about them. At last they  halted  to make their camp. They 
"was  very  powerful  in  those  parts  and  the Master wished  for  no  enmity with  him, "
believe  his  ears.  Soon  however  he  made  up  his  mind  that  he  could  not  be 
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?' 
"they muttered. ""We thought you had got some sensible notion, when you managed "
 
"was dark,  but  not  too  dark  for  the  night-eyes of  Orcs,  and  in  the "
"stair  outside,  a  huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black  mail "
"Rivy Andrusyak,4268242083213667,28-04-1992
"
"Clarabelle Hughman,4017950755264,23-10-1982
"
####-he not have  a  glimpse of  wisdom?  Why  do  you speak  ever of  hiding and 
"     About mid-day  they  came to  a hill whose top  was wide and flattened, "
"Bilbo  would  have  liked  to  say:  ""A  warm  bath  and  late  breakfast  on  the  lawn "
     So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo 
"Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left  "
"darkness deepened. He loved elves, though he seldom met them; but he was a little "
"anybody about, and all  was  quiet; from the  Common  Room  there came a "
"     O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey; "
singly be destroyed.' 
""
"Sawyer Tyer,4228975199099616,29-09-1979
"
Terror  was beginning to grip him again. There was no sound save the  rap of 
"dwarf was  outside. Balin was most  surprised,  as  you  can  imagine;  but  glad  as  he "
they were  entering the Gate. Guessing  that they would  come at once to the 
"to heal, and only  his great-grandchildren, he thought,  would see the Shire "
together while we may. And then you shall ride with me.' 
"and up the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by "
"Then you  won't see the  fire, and  I shan't see you, and we'll both  be the "
"believed  that you were  a friend before the letter came,' he  said,  'or at "
     Frodo laid aside his cloak and took off the orc-mail and flung it away. 
"     'Right!  I'll see to the orders,'  said the landlord. 'Good night,  Mr. "
"     `I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn quietly; 'but though "
     'I cannot  imagine what information could be more terrifying  than your 
reserve now only my sword!' 
and sending it away quietly for a year or two.  But at the end o'  last year 
just  writing  an  ending  for it.  I had   thought of putting: and  he lived 
"     'They do cheer  the heart, don't they?  ' said Sam looking up.  'Elvish "
####-a new dark thought  grew in his mind. Never  for long had  hope died in  his 
"'The Cracks of  Doom,' he muttered, the old name rising  to his mind. 'Well, "
"others: it was the Elves that cured us of  dumbness long ago, and that was a  "
"Name,Credit Card,Birthday
"
"Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond  mistake from  above, over the "
doubtful; but it was  always  Gandalf who had the final word. The  Mines  of 
"besieged. You shall not depart from it, until you call on your side for a truce and a "
"have fallen out of his pocket, very luckily, before he was turned to stone. "
"last, 'if  I broke  your command, and  yet have done no more in your service "
"up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow "
"Treebeard  is Fangorn, the  guardian of the  forest; he is the oldest of the "
 
But  as they went his soldiers blew their horns in signal long arranged; and 
""
"walls;  'but also  some that is  less good, and  the streets could be better  "
     Her shoes of silver-grey. 
he said  in  a soft  voice. 'I wish to  speak to you. Will  you come down or  
"ached and his eyes saw phantom lights in  the  darkness, but he struggled to "
"####-These were  smooth,  cut  out  of  the  living  rock  broad  and  lair;  and  up,  up,  the "
I thought things looked very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He 
"     Round the  corner came  a black horse, no hobbit-pony  but a full-sized "
"set, uprooting the  evil in the fields that we know, so  that those who live "
"was grief at that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.' "
"along,  especially  when  they  are drawing near to home at night. With most  "
"sister  Rosie. 'But that was years  ago,'  he sighed, 'and far away. The way "
"as no matter, and cast it  in  the air with his  blessing. The little silver  "
"feared  to keep  the knives,  knowing  them  for  wha t  they  are:  work  of "
it. They are coming!' 
 
not 
accomplished much in an evening and a night!' 
wore a hood  that overshadowed his  face; but the gleam of his eyes could be 
and too many to oppose.  On foot even  Glorfindel and Aragorn together could 
"looking out  for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.' "
"     'I was delayed,'  said Gandalf, `and that  nearly proved our  ruin. And "
"Justine Keyme,4476765592462,24-04-1975
"
"     At last the company passed  through  the trees, and found that they had "
"     'Then  we  will  not,'  said  Denethor. 'Go  now and  rest as you  may. "
"with them have you? What did you go near them for?"" "
weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do  not tempt me! I dare not  
"Saraann Danslow,4371698814390,28-06-1977
"
stronger than ever they  felt again  the ill will  of  the  wood pressing on 
"expended, as if Caradhras was  satisfied  that the invaders had been  beaten "
"     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished,  and without them "
"     'After him!' said Thjoden. 'See that he does no harm to any, but do not "
"them,  you  cannot touch them. We tried once, .yes,  precious. I tried once; "
strong than  your hope  and fancy made it. So may other  things in which you 
"""Fourteen!  That's  the  first  time  I've  heard  one  from  ten  leave  fourteen.  You "
"     He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it "
"of  April, it being then  the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great "
return to me in the company  of the violent and  the ignorant. How should I?  
and they were silent. 
Boromir purposed to  go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan. 
with these outlandish folk.  You'll have  friends  in these parts. If any of 
"found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and  doubtfully from "
"mountain-side, loomed  the  Tower of Cirith Ungol, its stones glowing dully. "
"Bobinette Hendrix,4694873254167961,01-07-1984
"
"Nerissa Cloake,4041595248162,31-08-1975
"
"of Rohan must ride forth today, and we  will ride with them, axe, sword, and  "
"""In  the  name  of  Esgaroth  and  the  Forest,""  one  cried,  ""we  speak  unto  Thorin "
climb up  with Frodo;  for they seem  to have had some tidings of him and of 
"upon  the  ring  of  the Wargs,  a  tiny  spot  far  far  below.  But  eagles  have  keen  eyes "
"Legolas his companion. `Henceforward I will call  nothing fair, unless it be "
"of Sarn  Gebir,  and maybe at  last to the  great falls of  Rauros where the "
but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and  said that by  the will of  
"mixed  up  with it: Aragorn's affairs, and the White Council and Gondor, and "
"camp and set a guard, and most of them slept uneasily with dreams in which there "
Sauron  would deal  with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they 
"this they  fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that "
"Tirith, and to  escape at least for a while from  the  terror of  the Enemy. "
"months.  He has taken Orcs into his service,  and Wolf-riders, and evil Men,  "
"South-gate of Bree.  It was locked fast; and the rain  blew in  their faces,  "
"a  tale it is, happy -ending or sad-ending, but the people  in it don't know.  "
"What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now? "
####- 
"     On the western flank  of Weathertop they  found a  sheltered hollow, at "
     Through Evernight he back was borne 
come swiftly if I call!' 
"tiny  light aloft. Every now and again, while he was still near enough,  they caught "
"     The winds of wrath came driving him, "
"Antonius White,4041593047095,08-09-1993
"
"and the Company was stirring and getting ready to start again, he descried a  "
""
####-unable  to find peace or relief ever in  life again. But Sam had no words to 
     Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. 'All 
"below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed "
neither have  long in the world. It  is quicker and  closer with  trees  and 
bring him back to rest with his own people.' 
"through  it  Gandalf passed,  and they followed him. Then to their amazement "
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell. 
Adelard 
flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast. 
other gear. 
"dike that here ran beside  it;  and then at a cry from Gandalf he  was gone, "
and you.' Then to  the astonishment and amusement of  the Men he plunged his 
"     Terrified  Pippin lay still, though the pain at  his wrists  and ankles "
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he 
"Gandalf,  too,  I  may  say,  was  there,  sitting  on  the  ground  as  if  in  deep  thought, "
"Veronika Salerg,4044778296744718,15-09-1976
"
"####-brightly again. Their fear left them, though they still felt uneasy. But the "
"####-through  the lands.  The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey, "
"Translations from the Elvish, by B.B. "
"still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is all that I "
"last,  'I do not  like  th is  place either; but  I  cannot think of anywhere "
"     'Aye, we  will,' said Gimli. `The legs of Men will lag on a rough road, "
drink  and  make  merry  and  forget  your  tasks.  Small  wonder  if  I  fall  asleep  from 
"     'No,  and I don't  want to,' said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do you  "
the gathering of the Mark.' 
"Danya Derbyshire,4721582530577466,25-12-1975
"
Michel Delving. The  Mathom-house it was  called; for  anything that Hobbits 
"Yettie Eckford,4017951148192534,14-10-1996
"
"of holly, and their supper -breakfast was merrier than it had been since they "
"his strength, so their voices, which uttered only his  will and  his malice, "
"however, nothing to show that for certain.' "
"     'I  do not ride elf-fashion,  except on Shadowfax,' said Gandalf.  'But "
"     Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up, fingering "
"went off down the highway  to the  Fords, and some turned  away µ  and  went "
"sound of merriment, for days upon days without count.  It fell upon his ears "
He looked out.  Clear sky  was  growing in the East once more. The skirts of 
"Harad, Easterling and  Southron, saw  the ruin of their war  and  the  great "
Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.' 
dwindling ruins of a  road of long  ago. In steep places stairs of stone had 
"     'If you don't let me in, Frodo, I  shall blow your door right down your "
little  way  up into one of  the  larger of the bay-trees. For  a  moment he 
flames about  the  trees sprang suddenly up above  the highest branches. They went 
     It was one of the saddest hours  in their lives. The great chimney rose 
like a claw. 
with a great scream he crashed upon his side: a black dart had pierced  him. 
"Eilenach;  and  there they go speeding  west:  Nardol,  Erelas,  Min-Rimmon, "
"know  why  he  should, sitting  in his  big  chair up in his  great   castle, "
"currents of cooler air upon  their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings "
"Beregond again, who  had just  come from an errand over the Pelennor  out to "
are about. They can see a long way. Stay and hide with me! ' 
     'How then do you read this riddle?' asked Gimli. 
"like  a  tunnel:  a  very  comfortable  tunnel without  smoke, with  panelled walls,  and "
"Bathsheba Epperson,4041598549344808,23-11-1994
"
"     'What is this, my lord?' said the wizard. 'The houses  of the  dead are "
"of  the Eagles,  to whom Gandalf had now  spoken. Back  swept  the great birds  that "
"upraised hand   the  foul Messenger recoiled, and  Gandalf  coming seized and "
"for several miles, until the broadening of the road and  the beginnings of a  "
"     South  and  west  it looked  towards  the  warm lower vales  of Anduin, "
sword; beneath his  feet  they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening  
"     From helm to sea they saw him leap, "
"     Let them a journey new begin, "
"Rodrique Rowthorne,4041592305064,22-12-1991
"
"peril near despair, yet that deadly peril is removed.' "
"Buddie Gilliard,4017958538431,28-10-1986
"
"""Very  well,  very  well,""  they  answered  rolling  the  barrels  to  the  opening.  ""On "
"the right floated, white on green, a great horse running free; upon the left  "
wound. Then as  he  had  kept watch Sam  had  noticed that at times  a light 
"saying a lot.""' "
that way!  ' 
on 
"valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking. "
"Linzy Ipsly,4041597776590,12-07-1988
"
"Mandi Epple,4041592432876,02-02-1978
"
"him and stuck oat his bushy eyebrows, till Bilbo shut his mouth tight with a snap. "
and cloven helms and shields into  a  heap. 'See!' cried  Aragorn. 'Here  we 
and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about  the triple hide of 
extraordinary  fashion.  He  had  not  been  down  that  way  under  The  Hill  for  ages 
"Janeczka Allan,4041599332395122,15-07-1982
"
came to  Linhir above  the mouth  of  Gilrain.  And  there  men  of  Lamedon 
 
of steel withstood the stroke. 
"Thereupon  the  twelve  dwarves-not  Thorin,  he  was  too  important,  and  stayed "
"     `If there  are any  to  see, then I at  least am revealed to  them,' he "
would turn. 
not laughed suddenly. 
"they  rode into the West. But here, over the desert and the  reeking marshes "
"world, and  soon they were  deep in talk, and  they stayed  up far into  the "
"had  died away, they  were repeated:  tap-tom,  tom-tap, tap-tap, tom.  They  "
"Pippin  suddenly,  clutching at Gandalf's cloak.  'Look! Fire, red fire! Are "
"and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where  all had looked so shabby "
"harder  than tempered steel. Its beauty  was like to  that of common silver, "
"Sena Jakubovits,4799747303892,11-01-1996
"
Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would be small. Only 
With  that  they  went  back  to  the  camp;  but  Thorin  sent  messengers  by  Róac 
to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door. 
"Though I said  ""absurd"" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and "
 
"his head, looking up at the ceiling. upon which lights were flickering, like "
"     'Not  till you've  had  a mouthful,  Sam,' said Frodo. `I won't  budge. "
"belonged  to  victims-and  among  them  were  several  swords  of  various  makes, "
the  faint lap and  gurgle  of  the River fretting among the  tree-roots and 
"kindled within,  bent, laden  with  years,  but holding a  power beyond  the "
"had  pity,  for  he  was  the  lord  of  a  good  and  kindly  people;  so  turning  his march, "
folk and wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the king. 
"though it might have been  better, if you  had learned something of it, when "
Both of them  felt restless again. On  Frodo suddenly the  shadow of parting  
""
"was  absolutely  no  use  sending Bilbo). There  is  nothing  like  looking,  if  you want "
"""Go on telling, then!"" said Beorn, who was never very polite. "
"Jenilee Sunnucks,4041597237791,01-09-1990
"
"     out of loss, out of life, unto long glory. "
"Addy Kennet,4041378013664001,16-12-2001
"
"road to  the Closed Door. It stood wide open,  and the porter lay before it. "
"Beneath his feet, beneath the moon. "
####-* PROLOGUE * 
"fourteenth  share of  all  the  silver  and gold, wrought  and unwrought, was given up "
"fields below and yawned, and then he sighed. "
waiting and labours was come to fulfilment. 
"Karly Garner,4783226965579,04-05-1975
"
     'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!' 
outer passages. They  could only pass across it in single file. At the brink  
"Rivendell. The air grew warmer as  they got  lower, and  the  smell of  the pine-trees "
"to the rejoicing in  Cormallen beyond Cair Andros, where your brother awaits "
"come  below;  and  they  are  as  dead  as  stones. Also  he  has  not  explained  this!"" He "
"the eyes. Here,  take  the  star -glass.  Do  not be afraid. Hold  it  up and "
"The prisoners were brought before him; and though he looked grimly at them, "
 
It was a long list. But anyway you do not seem to fit in anywhere!' 
"The  yells  and  yammering,  croaking,  jibbering  and  jabbering;  howls,  growls "
glooms  and the sad  mists  that clung  about  the Mountains of  Shadow; and 
"two!"" Thorin ordered. ""It seems we have got to go and help our burglar."" "
"     'The  friend I speak of  is not an Elf,' said Legolas; 'I  mean  Gimli, "
"     Eldest of all, the elf-children; "
"hands in horror. 'Guests unable to sleep in  their beds,  and good  bolsters "
"Mallorie Quantick,4041374484225026,06-01-1984
"
"     There  Pippin,  staring uneasily about  him, saw that he was in  a wide "
"his  mind  that  it  was  his  duty,  that  he  must  turn  back-and  very miserable  he  felt "
of Pippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the  hobbits looked at Frodo and 
started to ride back. 
"only to the edge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.  "
"gallopers,  as swift to fly  as to  advance, Thjoden Horsemaster. Long ago I "
"come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.' "
them lying open in the wilderness  for any eyes  to see. 'Stinker picked  up 
"you made me do it,' he hissed. "
be overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness. With its own weapons was 
"between two other men, came Grnma  the  Wormtongue. His face was very "
picked men of the Tower of Guard. 
"the more  active  dwarves,  such  as Kili,  to  exchange  such  news  as  there was,  or  to "
we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no more! Come! We 
may be no Smaug at the bottom but then again there may be. Don't let us take any 
"     'No, don't!' said Merry and  Pippin together, sitting suddenly upright. "
"lands, Mr. Gollum?' he growled. 'We wonders.  aye,  we wonders. To find "
"coming out  from the main  trail behind and in  front, and then  they curved "
after their fellowship was broken on the  evil day  at Parth Galen by Rauros 
"Eugenie Walkowski,4041372319046,28-08-1991
"
"     When winter passed, she came again, "
"     'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some of "
"Twilight, but with memory of other things.  For  as the Rohirrim do, we  now "
"of his many missing buttons. ""I am a wizard,"" continued Gandalf. ""I have heard of "
"     'I also will come,' said Legolas, 'for I do not fear the Dead.' "
cannot hope to come to Gondor's aid today.' 
eyes just closed down on their own.' 
"Hadrian Southeran,4041595395260,10-02-1996
"
"won't come with us, you had better get off without any more talk!"" "
"to the Captains that they shall wait on me here, as soon as may be after the "
"in  the very stroke, the sword of Denethor flew  up and left  his  grasp and "
"throats.  ""Good-bye and good luck, wherever you fare!"" said Balin at last. ""If ever "
"Andras Sydry,4041374434728,11-01-1976
"
accounted the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of 
clear voice spoke in an  elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what 
indeed. 
say. Of the enemy no movement could be seen; not even an orc-spy was 
"Britteny Gencke,4669885362309,12-07-1981
"
"the roof, above the thin wisps  of  issuing smoke,  the sky showed  pale and "
"had been hewn  down or shot;  others in pairs, still  grappling one another, "
"     'Do you wish then,' said Faramir, 'that our places had been exchanged?' "
"wizard though he was. But they took no notice, and they went on singing. "
     'The Winged  Messenger!' cried  Legolas. 'I shot at him with the bow of 
could  do  the  same  to  you: we know some  wrestling tricks in  my  little 
represent our kindred. We also will come behind.' 
""
deserted; not even wild animals seemed  to have used  it  in all  the days of Smaug's 
"mind of the  Enemy, wrestling  with  him. And so it  is that he is old, worn "
don't they drink? Or do they just live on foul air and poison?' 
"     nef aear, sn nef aearon! "
     The Company were  footsore and tired; but they  trudged  doggedly along 
ring. 
"""What's the good of that? The boat is sure to be tied up, even if we could hook "
hobbits listening to their talk. 
"off  and days remote. Very  useful, no doubt, that  was  to Saruman;  yet it "
would not share yours. If you have any.' 
     `Go now! ' said Celeborn. `You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even 
unnoticed. But  I shall try to get  lost as soon as possible.  I know one or  
     Gandalf  did not  look  at Pippin or  speak a word to him as they went. 
"     'My heart  bids me go on,'  said Legolas. 'But we must hold together. I "
"Jeromy Valiant,4041598272191269,06-05-1998
"
     Drawing a  deep breath they passed inside. In  a few steps they were in 
"and  yet when it  had passed, suddenly their hearts were lifted up in such a  "
""
"Travus Dickerline,4017956509673,15-03-1990
"
filled with the light of white stars.  
there because of  the outlets through fissures  in the rock  far above. None 
darkly green at the nearer edge even in the spring. There far away was the Lonely 
"came to the mouth of Nan Curunnr,' said Aragorn. 'We feared that Saruman "
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I  could  have brought  the thing here 
"Sauron, but have purposes of  their own. Some have been in this world longer  "
one day.' To which the other half of his mind always replied: 'Not yet.' 
"     He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir's hand. "
"####-punishment? However, that  is not for me to judge, happily. But tonight  you  "
pillows of grass.  
"     'Smjagol will fetch water, yes,' said Gollum. 'But what does the hobbit "
"drawing  it after me. And I suppose I  must go alone, if I am to do that and "
"now we  are  a  little  rested,""  he  said.  ""They will  be  out  after  us  in  hundreds when "
little lad.' 
mountains no messenger had  returned nor any rumour  of what was passing  in 
"Halfast have seen  queer  folk crossing the  Shire  - crossing  it, mind you: "
in putting  on the Ring  in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking 
He could not think what to do; nor could he think what had happened; or why 
"     Frodo and Sam were  plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer able to  "
""
"Phedra Cocker,4017952051655236,21-11-1986
"
"fell  to the ground  and lay still.  Sam had seen no  arrows, but he guessed "
     Saruman laughed  again. 'Not he! When his tools have done their task he 
"of dismay came over his face. 'Do not  tell me that he has changed his mind,  "
"had shrunk: a  tall stern shadow, a mighty lord  who hid  his  brightness in "
"other  Men, like  the men of  Rohan; for even they, who are the  foes of the "
Chapter 6. The King of the Golden Hall 
"remain ever clear  and unstained in your heart, and  shall neither  fade nor  "
     In shining lamps of crystal hewn  
"     'Just  hold on a moment, and  I'll  get my stuff!' cried  Sam  eagerly. "
"Stace McKimmey,4665648961502,31-07-1987
"
"     At last,  on the  fifth morning since  they took the road  with Gollum, "
their  rulers might heal  the  hurts of  the world that he has wrought.  But 
"And I think time you had better all come with me."" "
"back to  the King, to whom it belongs. Though maybe he will not need it.' "
"Rochell Emblen,4694367953532,04-07-1999
"
only a little food.' 
     'Let Ghvn-buri-Ghvn finish!' said the Wild Man. 'More than one road  he  
"name. My brothers, R®mil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue. "
"Gina Grahame,4041375637220,16-09-1995
"
"twilight. Beyond them was a wide level space, as though the floor of a great "
"Lorilyn Maulin,4041596798944294,08-02-1975
"
     `Orcs! ' cried Gimli. 
could  see  any  ships  that  approached. And looking thither they cried  in  
"     'I see that strange tales  are woven about you,'  said  Denethor,  'and "
"perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of  this, and  "
"danger is for Him, and for us. He will come  out of the Black  Gate one day,  "
red-brick building was being put up  where it had stood. Lots of  folk  were 
Up from mere and pool at night! 
longer had any doubt about his duty: he must rescue  his master or perish in 
"service, but not from my friendship.  You shall abide here, and if you will, "
"     Pippin  and  Merry sat up.  Their guards,  Isengarders,  had  gone with "
"Milton Laffranconi,4041595942465289,12-05-1985
"
breakfast: a drink  and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be  packed 
long at Gandalf. 
and cower in the light and heat. 
     Thereupon  Elrond paused a  while  and  sighed.  `I  remember  well the 
with his wide-splayed hands upon the ground. 
than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.' 
     There is another astonishing  thing about Hobbits of old  that must  be 
ruins and a land ravaged behind us. And yet we learn from the  Rohirrim that 
"Frederich Huglin,4017955874630294,20-02-1977
"
"out.  Then  he shut it quietly and  sat  down again. 'I have quick ears,' he "
     Where many paths and errands meet. 
the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.' 
"dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his "
"Janifer Harmant,4494603221347384,13-03-1984
"
was long and gleaming and  on his  helm was  a crown.  In one hand he held a  
"come. If any wanderer had chanced  to  pass,  little would he  have seen  or  "
"Yet I wish he were banished from the world!"" "
"Tyson Vader,4017955106670159,24-05-1995
"
than a strangling snake. 
he says now many peoples  are saying.  It's here  in the North that  the big 
thought that  we'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at  him!  Like a  
knew the shuddering cry that he had heard: it was the same that he had heard 
"walls and  the luminous pavement  of  the  road Frodo could  see them, small "
"     'No, sweet  one. See, my precious: if  we  has it, then we  can escape, "
Bilbo lost his buttons. As a matter of fact it was well known to anybody who was 
Boromir. 
 
"     'Still, there may be no connexion between  this rider and the  Gaffer's "
Bilbo's  Birthday Party year after year  until  they got used to it. He said 
from the grey and misty  northern  range  of Ered Lithui a long jutting arm; 
"it, and the bright blade of And®ril shone like a sudden flame as he swept it "
"     'For mithril,' answered  Gandalf. `The  wealth of Moria was not in gold "
"     A shrill shriek; suddenly cut off, came from an open window high above. "
"     When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a day or two, "
"     'I drew it forth,'  said  Imrahil, 'and staunched the wound. But I  did "
"     'Anything that  can keep so  in this  devi l's mirk,' answered  Elfhelm. "
"Lisha Spours,4041591183835,19-08-1996
"
"long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when "
"look  at  it.  And  still  sometimes  he  put  it  on,  when  he  could  not  bear  to  be  parted "
even with what  they had got  from  the  trolls. One morning  they  forded a  river at a 
Hold the middle of the stream! ' 
as he lay. 
daring to  use the elven -light; and as  he went he tried to fit together the 
"new-drawn ale, and  wooden platters  and cups. They put  all into  a  wicker  "
"of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days he is, and he listens to all "
"both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all, "
Now  a  nasty  suspicion  began  to  grow  in  his  mind-had  the  dwarves  forgotten 
     ent. 
as 
not 
"it was still a waste of soft mud,  it had been smitten with a shower of bolts "
     'But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in the 
"the  evil things  and good  things,  things  friendly and things unfriendly, "
"wickedness; to them the Enemy had  given rings of power, and he had "
     Then without  turning  Aragorn  cried aloud so  that  all  could  hear: 
"""Now  we  see  you,  you  nasty  little  creature!  We  will  eat  you  and  leave  your "
"     'It is a long  way for  a man to walk, young or old,'  said Aragorn. 'I "
"     Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn "
""
"Charley Frango,4527504840661539,06-10-1979
"
"     'Then I  will wish you this fortune for your  comfort, Gimli,' said the "
"loop of the Road,  which  further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater  "
"those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo son of Drogo. "
"     ' ""Sharkey,"" says they. ""So get out o' the road, old hagling!"" "
"     'So he journeyed by night up into  the highlands, and he found a little "
"impossible thing, then  somehow the errand would be  accomplished, or so  it "
had almost forgotten about  the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and 
"     Sam could  not see  the course  immediately above  him,  where  it  was "
"""Blimey, Bert, look what I've copped!"" said William. "
"####-jet, tipped with glimmering snows, flushed with the rose of morning. "
"     `I have  often wondered what you and Bilbo  wer e doing, so close in his "
said. 
"performer  now,  I  am  beginning  to  think  he might  go  through  the  Front Gate  and "
"lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his "
"     `It doesn't sound as if he knew we were here, does it? ' whispered Sam. "
"     they burst in stars of blue and green, "
"could say, for no man  ever  set foot upon that hill. The Death Down it  was "
"you  do  know  my  name,  though  you  don't  remember  that  I  belong  to  it.  I  am "
Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted. 
"dry little watercourse. Bilbo was a pretty fair shot with a stone, and it did not take "
"Marigold Mazzia,4041373280965,20-03-1979
"
here?' 
rags had been for an instant revealed The intake  of Gimli's breath could be 
"Bettina Raddenbury,4041590230445911,08-08-1987
"
####-keen hobbit-eyes  he  saw that many  more Men were about. He  could see 
     'Well now!  Who would have believed  it?'  said Ioreth to  a woman that 
"his  hand and halt  them, while he went forward a little, crouching, testing "
"of their  own  fathers and  to their  own  memories, and  they  speak  among "
"down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End.""' "
"he  told  his  men  to  unbind  them,  for  they  were  ragged  and  weary.  ""Besides  they "
"the  Shire to Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, and "
but at  its edges a  blue fire  flicked. Then holding the star aloft and the 
back  over the  field and  up the ramp to  the  gate of  the  Hornburg.  The 
"You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of the Iron Hills?"" "
"Wenonah Vickery,4017958088220043,09-04-1982
"
of arms.  
"Ole Cowell,4041377591672,25-07-1986
"
"     'Begone, and trouble me no more! If you touch me ever again,  you shall  "
"Fredrick Yardley,4017955489349,14-11-1979
"
dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far -off memories of 
"     'There  was a  battle here  three  nights ago,' said Gimli,  'and  here "
"sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men "
but we've kept going for hours and hours.' 
     Chapter 10  The Choices of Master Samwise   
"flying?"" "
""
"Miguel Giffon,4017959823075320,06-09-1988
"
""
with light and song for joy at Elrond's homecoming. 
"business --' He got  up and went to the door,  opened it quickly  and looked "
where  whiter blossom and richer fruit were growing. Yet there are no  trees 
"grew  near the falls; for that  was the custom  of the  Elves of  Lurien, to "
"Edmon Schafer,4301564998382389,24-05-1991
"
""
####-the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head. Poison frothed and bubbled 
"the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when "
"     `Near,' said Frodo,  'but  not in the gold.  There was no contention in "
and forty -four.  Your numbers were chosen to  fit this remarkable total: One 
"Hillyer Snoddon,4041597860410,13-09-1981
"
"servants  of  Sauron  its maker, so that if he gave heed,  he understood and "
"     'You are wise  and fearless  and fair, Lady  Galadriel,' said Frodo. `I  "
"heart burns me too, and I would  have  started sooner but now I must  rest a  "
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was 
"     'I am sorry, Mr. Merry,' said Hob, 'but it isn't allowed.' "
"meet  him.  Giants  they  seemed  to  him,  vast  grey  figures  silent  but "
"not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your "
"long loved as father is laid at last to rest, I will return.' "
"     `These are not holes,' said Gimli. `This is the great realm and city of "
sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to the present. 
"yourself? You  don't  really  suppose,  do  you,  that  all  your  adventures  and  escapes "
"in the valley-bottom, five leagues or  so as  the eye leaps, the Great River  "
to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If  you are 
of  standing  rocks.  The  dragon  came.  They  had  barely  time  to  fly  back  to  the 
"     'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle laugh. `But come,  you shall "
"him than you guess."" He gave Bilbo a queer look from under his bushy eyebrows, "
"Rings went on at intervals during the  years 1936 to 1949, a period in which  "
"     They talked then together as they ate, until presently Jomer spoke. 'It "
"""Revenge!""  he  snorted,  and  the  light  of  his  eyes  lit  the  the  hall  from  floor  to "
more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was 
"me see: one-that's Thorin; two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven; "
one thing he could do: trembling  he pulled  out the Ring upon its chain and 
"####-There was  the  sound,  too,  of  elven-harps and of sweet music; and as  it echoed up "
shall  not see him again.  Yet he is a kingly man of high  destiny. And take 
"Then they stamp, "
still it is now time to sleep again.' 
not  depart  from  this  place yet.  In  any  case  we  must  here await the 
"####-Fangorn loomed, slowly darkling as the sun  went west. They  saw no  sign of "
they  did or how many might be slain:  their purpose was  only to  test  the 
Mark at the coming of the morning.' 
westward bank and looked abroad. 
"Calypso Crawford,4017958102198746,03-04-1976
"
"Ivonne Shaudfurth,4440055553634,30-01-1979
"
is the last of that House.' 
     `But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that  none could lay it on another. 
am already late through bothering with you people. We may meet again before all 
"is  vain, and his victory will be swift and complete: so  complete that none "
"wains were  moving in  three  lines,  one swifter  drawn  by horses; another  "
"prisoners  into  the  forest.  Each  dwarf  was  blindfold,  but  that  did  not  make  much "
"into the  brambles and  laid  himself by Frodo's side ,  and putting away all "
courage and look! There are fell things below.' 
"     `Ah,'  said  Sam. `I  do;  and  I remember  more too.  I don't  like my "
     'Here is another riddle!' said Gimli.  'But it needs the light  of  day 
"burned  homestead or  barn,  upon hillock or mound, under wa ll or on  field,  "
"     'Then farewell!' said Faramir. 'But if I should return, think better of "
last driven the Necromancer from his dark hold in the south of Mirkwood. 
"Tookland,  but that  was not  true  of  many  other  families,  such  as the "
Alas that a fey mood should  fall  on a  man so greathearted in this hour of 
"haughty,  and  said  nothing  about  service;  but  poor Mr. Baggins  said  he was  sorry "
"####-won't kill us, nice hobbits.' "
"fathers  of the Stoors, for they loved  the  River, and often swam in it, or  "
"and then all the Wargs in the circle would answer their grey chief all together, and "
course of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of abode. Actually 
"Julita Scurrer,4239364686624532,25-06-1975
"
"     Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses  reeling in the "
     All day far below them a leaping stream had run down from the high pass 
"     'I wished to be loved by another,' she answered. 'But I desire no man's "
     The old king smiled. 'Grieve not! It is forgiven. Great  heart will not 
"Deeping Wall,  other  towards the causeway a nd  the ramp that led up to  the  "
"dancing  up  by  the  roof  to  amuse  them.  They  talked  and  talked,  and  forgot  about "
"his  strength, seeing the passage that he had already forced with  no  other  "
"nightfall, and  came  to  a  point where the Road bent  right  and  ran down "
Celeborn and Galadriel. 
     There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast. 
"     'Then I'll tell you what to think,' said Maggot. 'You should never have "
"     The third  part tells of  the  last defence against the Shadow, and the "
"has been among us, and even now we are mustering for battle in the Ea st.' "
taken away for ever.' 
"behind his head,  leaned  back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth "
"Vanni Gorst,4041374533588564,23-11-2000
"
both  menace  and  deceit; for  we knew  already that  the  power  that  has 
""
"Mada Phillins,4127497543832,18-10-1997
"
"over -kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others, and that "
"go  where  it  is  of  little  worth,  I  wish  to  part  in  friendship  from  you,  and  I  would "
"     When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about "
"     'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has come "
"have more sense,  coming a -waylaying Mr. Frodo and all.  And what's all this "
"     'I  know it well, dear  friend,' said Aragorn; 'but I would still  have "
     They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Their 
"just  trimming the grass-border  under  the window,  if you  follow me.'  He "
without meaning to. 
     I was looking for  a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted  to find him 
"Gay MacMakin,4041374499534172,25-05-1998
"
"Reagan Oby,4041591139274,25-12-1985
"
     From  the porch upon the top  of the high terrace they could see beyond 
should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and five  you have measured ere 
"####-his will thither, much of what is passing in the minds of men, even of those "
cannot answer the summons. Sauron will  only  believe that he  is withholding 
Another  horseman came riding swiftly  to his comrade's aid. Whether because 
"shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a  madness filled our foes,  but fear "
"charge is diminished in love  or in honour,' said Gandalf. 'And at the least "
"     All sat silent for a  while,  until  at length Boromir  spoke. `He is a  "
"darkness and foul dreams,  and  woke and found that  waking was worse.  Orcs "
"for two, he had better come alone and last. Come on Mr. Baggins! There is a gate "
     When  the sound of  hoof  and foot  had passed  he ventured a  whisper. 
if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that 
back north.' 
""
this?' said Sam. 
and rills went trickling down among the stones.  
"they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty,  and that is much "
"the  cloudy sky. 'Well, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'I've been having a look round "
"we  had  not  left  the mountain  pass  in  a  hurry.  Very  few people  live  in  these parts, "
"Stephen Graine,4085187596197157,31-12-1993
"
"ourselves,  or we'll  feel some  nasty fingers  round our necks one of these "
     But the courage that had been  awakened in  him was now   too strong: he 
the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with  the Ships  I never  
from the blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir  hurled  himself against the 
"the sky, and all night as I rode it came behind eating up the stars. Now the "
"fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I  lost  patience.  And  indeed I "
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more. 
     `Come! ' cried Frodo. `On! On! ' Wild joy at their escape from the very 
"     'I don't deny it,' said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. 'I "
us? Is the supper ready?' 
"     'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo,  for this, and for all our past  "
"spoons. Bilbo  believed that  she had  acquired a good  many of  his spoons,  "
they went back grumbling and cursing to guard the door. Bilbo had escaped. 
"were abroad,  and  that  you  were  astray bearing a  great  burden  without "
"had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge "
     He fell silent;  but Pippin and  Merry were  so eager for news that  at 
"didn't speak, because I had  a job to  do first. But now I have  spoken, and "
A  very  good  thing  too!  Dreadful  things  had  been  going  on  down  there.  The 
"light,  yellow and pale green, opened under  the grey shores of cloud. There "
"see Mr. Bilbo,' said Sam. 'And yet the only place I really want to  be in is "
"it, or so I judged. The right cannot be doubted.  The strength was  enough  - "
a cup of wine  and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but  he 
So  ended  the  adventures  of  the  Misty  Mountains.  Soon  Bilbo's  stomach  was 
"forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.' "
"pays in the  morning. There's Mr. Took, now: he's not vanished.' "
water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use they  did not 
"Darelle Napper,4017950310490,16-05-1984
"
"enemy, he rested and ate a little  before he crept away. But it is a comfort "
####-vast  extent  of  his  wealth  clear  to me.  I  should want  hundreds  of  years  to  bring  it 
     This then was the end of the debate  of the lords: that they should set 
"     'I hope that's the way of it,' said Sam. 'I wish we could be rid of him "
     The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars 
####-the West stars glinted bright. 
"Nannie Eykelhof,4041591853478,24-02-1999
"
bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.' 
would 
strangers. Behind his  chair  stood  a woman clad in white. At his feet upon 
"Isiahi Rodbourne,4041597518138159,07-12-1999
"
"the  storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the  main  battle had passed to "
you  find in them I cannot guess; but to send them as  spies into Mordor  is 
"must  resolve. It is the last  chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it "
ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.' 
"Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in "
"stocks of most stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not "
"afar. They still haunt Dr®adan Forest, it is said. Remnants of an older time "
was no hope of falling out  unseen: Now and  again the orc-driver fell  back  
that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.' 
Frodo to escape by flight along the road ahead. 
"Houses of  Hea ling,  while behind them walked Pippin with downcast head. "
"     Bilbo  was very rich  and very peculiar, and had been the wonder of the "
"     'Fare you well!' said  Ingold; and the men made way for Shadow fax, and "
"were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by  "
"you  did  very well,  if  you  ask me-you found out one very useful thing at any rate, "
"things.  ""I mean  about  the  gold  and  the  dragon,  and  all  that,  and  how  it  got  there, "
     `Who can tell?' said Aragorn. `But we will put it to the test one day.' 
their  turn long before learned  the art from  the Elves. And in  those days 
see him again.' 
"will shine out the  clearer, his  tears  ceased, and his laughter welled up, "
     Frodo and Sam did not  answer.  Hoisting their packs and  taking  their 
"on the Road, about  twenty -two  miles  from the Bridge. There  they meant to "
"there the king had once had many farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods.  "
The glare  faded from the cliffs.  The easterly wind that  had  been blowing 
####-####- 
"end  they  decided  to  mince  them  fine  and  boil  them. So  they got  a black pot,  and "
 
wonder.  Amid all the  wreck  of Isengard  this seemed to them the strangest  
"Jemima Sissel,4041590126777,07-12-1977
"
"Sandi Jephcott,4615943881834824,23-08-1990
"
"memory of an old wound, in his shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide. "
their secret;  for  wonder makes the words of  praise  louder.  And  Aragorn 
"     The  days  that followed were golden,  and Spring and Summer joined and "
"she should not be  permitted to do so,  if you  can in any way restrain her, "
"said  one.  ""If  we  have  got  to'  go  back  now  into  those  abominable  tunnels  to  look "
am a  nuisance  and  a  disturber  of the  peace. Some people  are  actually 
     Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean hungry 
still  who  go  abroad  for  the gathering  of news and the watching  of our 
"Bear Beckhouse,4041592173272,17-09-1995
"
"     `Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,' said Gimli. "
"should let him go leading us out into  some dark place  far from help, as he "
"himself took a hand. Picking  up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and "
"fighting-orc, like those of Shagrat's company, bearing the token of the Eye. "
"a door of  escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came through. "
"     'Our  last meal at  Bag End!'  said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They "
"Michel Delving before I started,  and packed  it with my  luggage: I brought  "
"Lauralee Dibbert,4041591516752,16-05-1983
"
"gazing curiously at him, both the Elvenking and Bard. A hobbit in elvish armour, "
"drawn  irresistibly  towards the  older world, and became an account,  as it "
     Sam  got  out the  rope. 'And  where were you  off  to in the cold hard 
"said Gandalf. 'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try.  "
"in  the hall,  and answering horns  and harsh cries  were heard further off. "
"     In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within "
"     `We must  learn more of this,' said Faramir, `and know  what brings you  "
"arrange-here, hold on! Wait! ' "
seen here.' 
"I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!' "
"opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches "
"boat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! ' "
"shadows  of the East. The  young moon  was glimmering in a misty sky, but it "
"Lyda Lowers,4801202060370389,27-08-1978
"
""
It 
"and some said east, and others south. But nowhere that we went could we find "
the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and 
"Halbarad lifted a great horn, and the blast of it echoed in Helm's Deep; and "
"     'This  is  where  we  turn aside, Sam,' said  Frodo. 'And we  must turn "
deeper  darker  forests  of  the  valleys  below.  Some  caught  hold  of  the  trunks  and 
Tower! Whence...? ' 
"     `Yes,' answered Frodo. 'I would rather see him than all  the towers and "
"thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with him;  but some dark doubt "
"croaked, and the  name fell dead almost as  it left his lips.  There  was no "
"     'A matter of  some importance  -  to us both,' answered Strider, looking "
"it might be, wrought of steel and iron, and guarded with towers and bastions "
"the snows  under Caradhras, and in  the  mines of Moria  where Gandalf fell.  "
""
Dike. There the company  halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the 
"stained red at the  edges, lay glimmering deeps of  yellow. The sky spoke of "
there  is  war enough before  the  Gate? Or has our  Enemy come even to Rath 
weapontake was set for the morrow.  When all is ordered we will set out. Ten 
     Already it  seemed that word of their coming had  gone before them: and 
"preserved  at  Undertowers,  the  home  of the Fairbairns,  Wardens  of  the "
"have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have our tales too, "
"trap shut, see? There's a reminder  for you!'  There was  a sound  like  the "
some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!' 
     The  great  doors slammed to. Boom.  The bars  of iron fell  into place 
"him; and with him the others should go, or at  least Meriadoc  and Peregrin , "
the ground. 
But please come to tea - any time you like! Why not tomorrow? Come tomorrow! 
"     The face of their enemy was not turned towards him, but still he hardly "
hall. Frbr and Luni and  Nbli fell there. Then there are four lines  smeared 
"     `There is one of my  people yonder across the stream,' he said  `though "
rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the  keepers of the  gate  were on the 
"was  a swift  current which swung left,  towards the eastern shore where the "
"     'Only because  everything is now ready,' said Beregond. 'It  is but the "
"of churning water came  up from  far below, as if  some great mill-wheel was "
and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.' 
     He stood upon the bridge alone 
"####-in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes shone, and his voice was rich and "
broke the evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed. 
"     'No,'  said  Aragorn. 'Once he was as  great as his fame made h im.  His "
     Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion! 
were  crawling  like anthills:  orcs were  issuing out  of a thousand holes.  
 
"him: anyway all  his stuff went.  Yes, sold out and  gone,  I tell'ee.  Why?  "
brought in.' 
"treasure is likely to be your death, though the dragon is no more!""' "
"own  accounts speak  of the multiplying of Men in  the land, and of a shadow "
     And now  the  fighting waxed furious on the fields of the Pelennor; and 
"Elder  Days  and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and  captains "
"""I might  have  guessed  it,""  said Bilbo.  ""Truly  there  can;  nowhere  be found the "
"Darryl Hamm,4041374716462389,26-11-1996
"
reported  that  no  enemies remained  upon the  roads  east  as  far  as the 
####-would be too tiring to repeat it all.' 
"silent, and  the other two  sat  without  moving, wondering what  way things "
"     'Keep close to the  fire, with your faces outward!' cried Strider. 'Get "
     'Three  suns already have risen on  our  chase and brought no counsel ' 
####-the village. 
"eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of "
the Dark  Lord long ago. Are  they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they not 
     and words unheard were spoken then 
"Nancy Cholmondeley,4041372801662,28-12-2001
"
"hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands  and leave us,  gollum, gollum. ' "
"his face  the glitter in the Elf's  bright  eyes. Behind them rode  Elladan, "
the vast danger that lay in wait. At any rate after a short halt go on he did; and you 
odd.' 
"it's  no wonder they left  you a lone. They wouldn't go for  armed folk, with "
some memory stirred in him. `We must fend for ourselves tonight.  We will go 
""
"     Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, said Frodo, and he la back  in Sam's "
"""The  new  Master  is  of  wiser  kind,""  said  Balin,  ""and  very  popular,  for,  of "
####- 
"Shadow has crept northward  all about  us. Some speak of departing, yet  for  "
Chapter 1. The Departure of Boromir 
"     `It's  warm!' said Sam. `Meaning your hand, Mr.  Frodo. It has  felt so "
"Kristal Boncore,4536900092556865,09-10-1995
"
a 
accessory volume. 
"Ernesto Willets,4828604749584083,02-09-1992
"
shall I have again under beech or under elm.' 
Boromir. 'The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears.' 
"he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps and things; but in "
"     Then  Jowyn gave to Merry  an ancient horn, small but cunningly wrought "
"     Sam  eased the pack on  his shoulders, and  went over anxiously  in his "
"     'All  right,'  said Frodo  in a  remote voice, as of one  speaking half "
until  it  became a roof: they were shut  in a  hall of  mist  whose central 
"Calypso Tacey,4041594800633,14-12-2001
"
"Alanah McKeveney,4017956922447,02-12-1989
"
worst. Now I've got a plan.' 
and whether he was a friend of the goblins. 
"Loree Daouse,4664668201891960,02-05-1992
"
"keeps. There are not  many in Middle-earth that I  should  say were safe, if "
"     Gildor  was silent for a moment. 'I do not like this news,' he said  at "
"     It was  during 1944  that, leaving the loose ends and perplexities of a  "
"What goes on there now I don't know for certain, but I don't suppose anyone lives "
"going  as  softly  as  a  hobbit  can.  Soon  they  came  to  places  where,  as  Bilbo  had "
"will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe, "
"and  what  tale can  you tell of yourselves? As for my name!'  He broke off,  "
"southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep  "
maggots and the apes of Lugb®rz. No good trying  to charge with them. They'd 
"three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be  returned to you, "
"where it is never found wild, and flourishes  only in  warm sheltered places "
"Tressa Sidebotham,4041376321739986,19-08-1983
"
####-thought. 
"     'Or spears,' said Gimli. "
Pippin. 
"told  them,  it had been green and fair. There was  little grass, and before  long  there "
the  Lady knows who and what is each member of  your  Company.  New 
"####-If  hard days  have made  me  any judge of Men's words and faces, then I may "
Pippin. 
"Cristine Bonnett,4041375815461,27-09-1998
"
Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring. 
about it-when he heard voices. 
"Carolynn Duprey,4041591900065815,08-03-1995
"
"off south, those that escaped alive. The  Thain has gone after them, to hold "
"####-noise, as a wind  in the valley, and the ground trembled; and all were afraid "
     He  came forward into  the  firelight;  but most of the company  backed 
"Corbie Dummigan,4041371962973374,09-04-1980
"
"could  not  tell. But  it  seemed  that  some  good magic  lingered  in  such  spots, which "
"single red case, were  the three large  volumes, bound in  red leather, that "
"Shagrat, Gorbag, and company  have done nearly all my job for me. Except for  "
"     In the  midst of  the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised, "
him!' 
forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree reaching out above them.  
"Alard Cullerne,4038834169010980,02-11-1983
"
"Brandie Samarth,4041378275456856,24-10-1975
"
"Siouxie Robinett,4017954879609932,19-03-2001
"
"     'Lady,' he answered, 'you are  not  yet  healed, and I was commanded to "
"black figures in rank upon rank,  marching  swiftly  and  silently,  passing "
     The Ents  went  striding  on at a great pace. They had descended into a  
Who are  you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how  
some truth in it. 
"Nori  (who  shared  the hobbit's views about  regular meals, plenty and often). They "
"toys the like  of which they had  never seen before, all beautiful and  some "
adventure.' 
and yet strangely light. Merry and Pippin alone could  carry their boat with 
     Now  the  main retreat  was scarcely  two furlongs distant. Out of  the 
"     'I  am called Strider,'  he said  in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to "
tired. This is far heavier. And what's the use of it? We shan't win  through 
"     Then Gandalf  said:  'Let us not  stay  at the door,  for the  time  is "
"     'And by the love of him also,' said Legolas. 'For all those who come to "
to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning wore on the wind 
were  evidently meant to go  with the  great people. But you  would  not have  
"Jacquelin MacLucais,4041374452464,05-04-1993
"
fragrance that came to each was like a memory of dewy mornings of 
"     'They have left us fruit  and drink, and bread,' said Pippin. 'Come and "
end upon a dais of many steps was set a high throne under a canopy of marble 
much about Gandalf's movements when he is not there. 
"year (S.R. 1342),  and nothing very notable occurred in the  Shire until Mr. "
"Beregond. 'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold "
"was peace now, neither strain of will, nor madness, nor any fear. His burden "
     I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing. 
"to advise you for your own good, but  you scarcely listened. You  are  proud "
"disturbed and bounded off, crashing down with a dust and a noise. Before long the "
"'""Since  such  is  your  answer,""  he  called  in  return,  ""I  declare  the  Mountain "
west a  grey shadow crept over  their faces. But Faramir burned with a fever  
     Chapter 6   Many Partings  
"if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.' "
"     Sam sat  down, blushing and muttering.  `A nice  pickle we  have landed  "
"Drusy Rostern,4017959500745,08-06-2000
"
"Hoom! I gave  him some long tales, or at least what might be thought long in "
"too young, and he was also more careful  - but  he was not careful enough. If "
as all trespassing beasts knew very well. 
"they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave  and "
side of the  dingle  with  a  cool yellow  light.  There they  saw  a little 
Gorgoroth to cross.  
left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man. 
his hand was a  white rod  with a  golden knob. He did not look up. Solemnly 
     A loon is he that will not sing: 
"hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey."" "
"     `Here  is the  heart of Elvendom on earth,' he said, `and here my heart "
yet they were aware: some dreadful  spirit of evil vigilance  abode in them. 
"Eryn Balle,4041374437068978,17-12-1999
"
"the  Last Mountain.  Part of the name of this place might be Wellinghall, if "
"piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between wonder, joy,  "
"""Who are these miserable persons?"" said the Great Goblin. "
"riddles. We tracked you  as  far  as  the forest, but there  are  still many "
as far as it went. 
"in  the  story  of  Bilbo's  great  adventure  is  only  a  small  one,  though  important,  as "
"     'Farewell! Follow fast!' cried Gandalf. 'Away, Shadowfax!' "
"It was rather an old one, too, and Gollum knew the answer as well as you do. "
     Sam  felt that he  could sit like that in endless happiness; but it was 
"     All that day they plodded along, until the cold  and early evening came "
did not know it. 
"long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs  were stretched out before him, "
"Bartlett Tolan,4041599318649,16-04-1978
"
"""Very well  then, we must  just  tighten our belts  and  trudge on  - or  we shall be "
     'But I'm  sure  the Lady  would not like me to keep it all  for my  own 
What is your counsel?' 
"nothing of wizardry or war, welcoming  only  the morning that in the sky far  "
back  to  the  boat.  He  sat  down  in  the  dark  by  Bilbo.  That  made  the  hobbit  most 
     Their land  was originally unprotected from the East; but on  that side 
day they  set out  along  the Road and jogged  along  steadily. The wind had 
"the  Lord  of Mordor,  using  his own arts,  he  would then  set  himself on "
their riders came down into the lower glades of the wood they burst into a song of 
"that  of  course  is  the  answer,  and  Gollum  soon  gave  it.  Then  he  thought  the  time "
"Noel Hiscoke,4041595304187893,20-09-2001
"
"were all of the same kindred, and all had  the same eyes: not all so old  or  "
"into the high places, among the birches that he loves  best, and he will not "
"him and pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he  drew his own "
"know  his  name  and  all  about  him,  although  he  had  never  been  them  before.  He "
more information concerning hobbits and their adventures. But the story  was 
on the other side. 
""
"blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make  the journey "
a  long pale tongue. 'Such a resolve  might be expected  from a lord of  the 
"friends watched  over him, warming him,  and bathing  his  wound.  The night "
"Middle-earth. All the children born or begotten in that year, and there were "
     'At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming a nd booming to 
"from the North, east of the River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard "
"Rozele Gordge,4041595529935704,30-05-1996
"
"tent,  but  none  of  the men  of  the  town would  stay with  them  even  for  the  night  so "
on the fair paths of Lurien.' 
fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A  star  came out above the trees in 
"of  the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it "
"alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that's "
"     `About an hour ago,  just  before you  saw us.  A message  came: Nazgyl "
"lids. Almost  spider -like  he  looked now, crouched  back on his bent limbs, "
"astonished porter, out through  the door, and on, till he came near the gate "
these  here  thrust  forward west  from  the main mass  in  long  steep-sided ridges  that 
"the first, day of the last moon of Autumn on the threshold of Winter. We still call it "
more  bitterness and shame for a man's heart than  to  behold the  love of a  
friends.' 
in a  porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the 
"spoke,  as he drained  the  horn  at that feast which  Brego made  to hallow "
think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember  the words of Jomer: he walks 
"spurred  to  the  standard,  hewed staff  and bearer;  and the black serpent "
"abandon such a quest as mine. My duty at least is clear, to go on. Come now, "
"     `We  shall have to  try going faster tomorrow. You lie down  now, and I "
shriek. The hobbits had heard just such a cry far away in the Marish as they 
"beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was "
"recalled  you,  putting forth all his power,  and  sent you  into the  sweet "
"Eda Bretelle,4041375284189,30-07-2001
"
     And the cloaked man spoke and said:  'He is  come.' And they saw  as he 
were  about; now  it was bright  as blue  flame  for delight  in  the killing of  the great 
"down  the  sheer face  of the wall, pouring in silver  drops,  like  a   fine "
"'How came you by it?"" shouted Thorin in gathering rage. "
"inviting  them for  a  walk. 'Wait a bit, Gollum!'  cried Sam. `Not too  far "
swallowed  up in  a sudden temptation  to put on the Ring. The  desire to do  
"Dicky Forton,4041375525037,21-03-1987
"
 
"stand on their heads,'  he growled, gripping  the handle of his axe. 'In the "
"Ferdinand Karpychev,4410804975015158,19-10-1978
"
"still,  blinking. They  were in a  long  low room,  filled with the light of "
"""Also,"" went on Gandalf, ""I forgot  to mention  that with  the map went a key, a "
""
"The  passages  there  were  crossed  and  tangled  in  all  directions,  but  the  goblins "
"desire  the  power  of  wizard-lords,  only  strength  to  defend ourselves, "
"its edge, and  one old stump of a tree  with only two bent branches left: it "
####-All that  they make  out! One day  you'll  wish that you  had not said that. 
rule my own end.' 
In  all  their  talk  they  came  perpetually  back  to  one  thing: where was  Smaug? 
"     For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into "
"thing at a  time. When  I've had  a look at the fellow we have caught,  then "
"eastwards, up the  dark sloping  land. They could see little,  for the night "
     They halted and Frodo looked south wistfully. 'I should dearly  like to 
your Sam knowing it.' 
"in a blanket; yet  though the night was airless and windless, all  about him "
"     'No, not altogether wicked,' said Frodo. "
""
"away from the wicked lights, yes, yes, we must.' With these words he started "
""
"fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnant "
"Aeriel Brockman,4017953532371,30-08-1986
"
"afraid my bit of fire's been smoking. Now if I've gone  and brought trouble, "
"     'I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back to "
     and he shall dwell among you 
as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.' 
had 
"Wizard,  whose  fame in the Shire  was  due mainly to  his skill with fires,  "
end of his labours.  
"left -hand  passage plunged  down, while the right-hand climbed up,  and  the  "
first I must  go to Rivendell.  For  if there could be anything wanting in a  
 
"     'No hope while the Ring lasts,' said Frodo. "
black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower;  but many tall windows 
"Bellanca Gownge,4933159162896425,23-04-1992
"
"Dulcy Sabater,4041595560749,29-08-1995
"
     Gollum sat up  again  and looked at him under  his eyelids. 'He's  over  
"if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo!  ' "
"within; and the evening meal was ready, and he  was expected.  And Rose drew "
and impenetrable wall. 
have done in our  place. And according to  his wisdom  it would have  been a 
soon be behind them. 
not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret. 
"Zandra Maltman,4041597181098,20-06-1978
"
"####-""That'll be the end of our poor beasts!"" said Thorin. "
"mounds of treasure. Above him the sleeping dragon lay, a dire menace even in his "
"likely than the return of the King under the Mountain, if any such person had ever "
in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied Sea. The brief glow fell upon a  
'We are  near to the mountain-marches of the traitor Saruman. Also we are on 
wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave 
sighed. 
"     `Not yet, but night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is setting. "
"known, and looking into them they  saw the sky below them and the stars like "
"     'You  are full of courtesy this  morning,' laughed Legolas.  'But maybe. "
"sleep,""  be  said,  ""—for us, but not I think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest sound "
"really  was  something  of  a  bold  adventurer  about  himself  after  all,  though  he  I "
"Verine Noquet,4286815389029,20-09-1987
"
"well, since  you are  hasty folk and their full name is as long as  years of "
"The  reason,  no  doubt,  was  the  death  of  the  Great  Goblin,  and  all  the  excitement "
and Elrond the master of the house was their chief. He was as noble and as fair in 
 
lapping on the shore. 
"merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring  a ding dillo del! derry del, "
     'Yes!' said  Pippin. 'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I 
"Egbert Riediger,4105281779796,04-05-1980
"
great  river miles  south  of  the Carrock. At  that  point  there was  a  deep  ford which 
"huts and sheds, some so near the old westward windows that  they cut off all "
     Then  even  as he thought  these things the  first assault crashed into 
"have many wings.  Night oft brings news to  near kindred, 'tis said. Boromir  "
"the tree's foot. One day he refused to come down, and the guards had no mind "
just  another bag that  Dernhelm was  carrying. Dernhelm was  no comfort: he 
"Herold Henden,4041372581850,27-11-1982
"
"their piercing  points,  he  writhed,  tormented. Suddenly  he was aware  of "
"happy here, and I don't wish to go; but the days are running away, and Bilbo  "
lessened. 
said. 'Never again! Can't we get on and get away? ' 
####-of  his  head  and  his  heels  grew  properly  again:  it had  all been  singed  and  frizzled 
little less than his own size. This fight was not for him. Sam  swept up his 
"     'Well, what about it?' "
tum. 
"####-     Merry peered from behind Dernhelm's  back. Far away, maybe ten miles or  "
"     Farewell he bade to his free people, "
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the 
"stone  slab, six feet  above the  ground, and there they  sat dangling their "
tree  nor any visible water: it  was a country  of  grass  and short springy 
"Theo Walklot,4041597450071,28-12-1989
"
your 
"did not dare  to sing or  talk  too  loud,  for  the echoes were uncanny, and  the silence "
""
cloak was drawn over his face. 
"     Sam sat down and  scratched his head, and yawned like a  cavern. He was "
""
my friends in the Shire; but still I had some  hope.  I hoped that Frodo had 
Eagles are coming! And many voices answered crying:  The  Eagles are 
"morning.  I  am  looking  for  someone  to  share  in  an  adventure  that  I  am  arranging, "
from a  night's rest they sprang  from stone to stone. At last  they reached 
"     `Who are they? What are they? ' asked Sam shuddering, turning to Frodo, "
"arrive there may be serious trouble."" "
his will. 
very  brink; and beneath  it lay  the quays and  landings of the Harlond for  
made. But few marked what Isildur did.  He alone stood by his father in that 
at their parting. 
read these.' 
     Boromir smiled. 
"     There were  no more  sounds. Even the leaves were silent,  and the very "
"Lindie Emor,4017956854170657,12-05-1978
"
"it, and strike for more than one passage.' "
gate  seemed  to open  of its own  accord and close again without  a  sound. 
""
not sleep.  We  had a feeling  that anything  might  happen  at  any minute. 
Attercop! Attercop! 
"their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two "
"####-     '""Huorns will help,""  said Treebeard. Then he went  away and we did not  "
"would not hear of  it. So  they  spread out  their wet  things on  the  floor, and got dry "
""
trees.  There they hastily  kindled fire; for  Glorfindel knew that a  flood 
may take some time before he  learns his error. We must snatch that time. We 
vanishing almost in the twinkling of an  eye.  The forest  where Faramir had 
time the battle hangs in the balance.' 
after learned it was still two hours ere sunset of the day on which they had 
"     'It was  the  Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall,  as you might "
Jomer. 
"them so soon, indeed at  once. Yet that  would  have  to be  done  that very "
"servant, Gandalf will go;  for this shall be his  great task,  and maybe the "
Chapter 1. Many Meetings 
     The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but 
"vanished  from  sight,  if  not  from  all  danger.  A  magic  ring  of  that  sort  is  not  a "
"away  into dark  lands under  strange moons,  far over The Water and very  far  from "
own  business. Merry  and Pippin  climbed up the path that came in from  the 
"knew, "
huge white wings  were half lifted.  A music came down the river as it  drew 
"     `For myself,' said Faramir, 'I would see the White Tree in flower again "
""
"""Your  own wisdom must  decide  your  course,  but  thirteen  is  small  remnant  of "
upon my finger? Did you see my ring? ' she asked turning again to Sam. 
"should I sit here in  my tower and think, and watch, and wait, spending even "
evil already at work:  the lies  of Saruman; and the king  of the land would 
"the  hobbit  on his little shaggy grey pony,  and the Lord of  Rohan on  his "
"     When they had sung this  altogether after him, he  clapped them each on "
moonless nights but little  while ago  a great host in  strange array passed 
"After Weathertop our  journey will become more difficult, and  we shall have "
"the tables tonight. He ought to be here now to show us what is to be done."" "
"     But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs  about it yelled,  preparing to "
this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!' 
Northern  world.  I  hope  you  like  the  look  of  it.  Now  you  must  send  back  these 
of women looked out from dark doors; and so without horn or harp or music of 
"for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.' "
"     `  ""At  the worst,""  said he, ""our Enemy knows that we have  it not and "
"though Dbin did not  give leave willingly, he took with him  Ori and Uin and "
"river -side, not by hand,  but by the  water  swirling  down  from Sarn Gebir "
"     There  seemed to be a  great stone  in  the  way,  but the Orcs had got "
of silver; in their haggard hands  were  swords of steel. Their eyes fell on 
####-none  rose  in greater surprise  than  the  raft-men of the elves who were sitting at the 
"""Hear what I have got to say!"" ""What's that?"" they asked. "
and wider.  There  were  now no openings  to  other galleries or  tunnels on 
"old weather -stained breeches, tunic, and jacket. "
"Jerri Librey,4041595153758190,05-07-2001
"
rising  to  the blackened  rafters  in  search of  the way out  through  an opening  in  the 
"of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away. Bu t I "
"the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly tall, towering above "
####-you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have 
an aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards.  
"seemed that Beregond got as much honour from it as his guest, for Pippin was "
"Mitheithel. It  flows down out  of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells  north of "
house. 
been to hand. But help came swiftly; for Bard at once had speedy messengers sent 
"City  was master of his  Council,  and he was in no mood that day  to bow to "
"what  had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What "
"""Troop, was  right,""  he  said.  ""A  fine  comic  one.  Come  in my merry men,  and "
     'But what?' said Gandalf. 'Only one but will I allow tonight.' 
"like that: more like  somebody mimicking  a  bird-call, I  thought.  And I'm "
the great burning:  the ashes were  still hot  and smoking. Beside it was  a  
mace he wielded. 
"the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand "
"""You're a fat fool, William,"" said Bert, ""as I've said afore this evening."" "
"overhead, going maybe  on some swift errand  from Barad-dyr.  After  a while "
"sprang  between them, and raised his hand. 'Your pardon,  Jomer!' he  cried.  "
"     'Everything,' they answered. "
possible course  for him to take: he  must go on  and try to find  the  main 
found at the rising of the Sun.' 
"preventing them  from  scattering, and  driving them along the  line of  the "
"the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all "
morning. But  in Gondor in after -days it long  was said that  the elven-boat 
     fought and fell there in a far country: 
"hobbit standards. There were also many other things to follow, and when they "
Gandalf's eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.  
     and he is victorious. 
from the lips of other wanderers in the world.' 
"Elves, sir! Wonderful!' "
"many Men,  warriors and kings,  that walk alive under  the  Sun, and yet are "
"Denis Camock,4640639713164443,11-08-1995
"
"closely  set. 'I am  not  sure that I like  it: it  has  a - well, rather  a  "
"stood the sons of Elrond on  the left with the D®nedain  about them,  and on "
snapping. `Foolish!  Silly!  '  he hissed. `Make haste!  They  mustn't think  
have seen her with my eyes.' 
"that were  burning.  And Aragorn  spoke  in a  loud voice  to  the Dead Men, "
"     'Yes,' said Frodo; `but he  won't be full for some  days. I don't think  "
concern of yours are the  troubles of this land. But it was not by design of 
"waiting  on  the  mat,  and  then  open  the  door  like  a  pop-gun!  Let  me  introduce "
others were silent while Thjoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman. 
far away into dark  and danger.'  Then he told  them that these  blades were 
"Marita Tack,4041377170556935,17-12-1990
"
"Perkin Allitt,4041372297415289,01-04-1976
"
"enough, and perhaps wise enough.' "
"resisted  vanguard,  and  poured  now  in  rage  into  the  valley,  driving  wildly  up "
the  stony ridges  that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a  
in the  dusk.  And  suddenly  he  saw that he was  in the  picture  that was 
"Ingaberg Dudson,4041595638453,11-04-1998
"
blue air; but a shadow and a gloom brooded upon the Ephel D®ath. 
"brink,  and twisted round, scrabbling with  his toes for a  foothold.  It is "
"""I  was  having  such  a  lovely  dream,""  he  grumbled,  ""all  about  having  a  most "
brought with  them a great store of supplies; for  the dwarves can carry very heavy 
longer any walls upon either side. The dread  was  so  heavy on him  that he 
"aid. But we have suffered much loss in our battles with Saruman the traitor, "
"Bilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual.' "
"cedar  and cypress. and other  kinds  unknown in the Shire, with wide glades "
"from  head  to foot,  leaped  into  the chamber;  behind  him his  followers "
"""The  first day of  the dwarves' New Year,"" said Thorin, ""is as all should know "
shoulders above him he saw plainly a path or road.  It climbed like a rising 
that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had loved. 
which their passing feet echoed. There were fissures and chasms in the walls 
Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the slightest sign of 
"sang  songs  as  they  rode  forward  all  day,  except  of  course  when  they  stopped  for "
if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the  borders of  the  Shire 
"world, and he journeyed up the River, till  he came to a stream that  flowed "
"Land the air seemed almost dead, chill  and yet stifling. Sam looked  up out "
"     'Garn, what did I  say?' said the ruffian to his mates. 'I told Sharkey "
"Adore Gudyer,4041371366733,24-10-1981
"
"Lenette Goves,4017956561156510,17-03-1976
"
"faces of the three  hobbits lying beside Frodo. They  did not stir,  but the "
"at master,' as he thought. "
"     That Doom is near at hand, "
"Precious, as we promised. O yes.  And when we've  got  it  safe, then She'll "
cackled. `You should not look in when the candles are lit.' 
"Ian Dows,4214686394845,06-06-1999
"
"river -bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them "
"     'As well as ever, you may be sure,' said Gandalf. 'Quite untroubled and "
"not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight "
there were many leaves covered with Bilbo's thin wandering hand; but most of 
"Udall Stokes,4041597460732,17-09-1997
"
"Shayne Faas,4176980728485510,25-06-2001
"
"and  he was  so  pleased  that  he made  up  one  on  the  spot.  ""This'll  puzzle  the  nasty "
between you and was a cause of contention in  your Company. Clearly it is  a 
"elvish beauty,  as of one who has  long  passed the  shadows. And  with  the  "
"     'I shall not  walk. Time presses,' said  Gandalf.  Then lifting up  his "
"Lulu Maleham,4017950841684,28-10-1995
"
"     'Now  you  speak  to  yourself  again,'  said  Aragorn  with  a  smile. "
"     'One thief  deserves  another,' said  Saruman,  and turned his back  on "
and  the  banner and heralds  and  trumpeters.  There  was Gandalf as  chief 
"Drona Glanert,4834432871059,18-12-1993
"
light was all about them. 
kind to us and did a ll that he could.' 
"Marrilee Shepard,4561742364265,05-09-1987
"
"has not  yet  come. The Riders stirred at first, murmuring with approval  of "
""
"sudden gusts of wind, and spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky. "
"     'Where  did you learn  such  tales,  if  all  the  land  is  empty  and "
his strange behaviour. 
"Pauline Humphrey,4401520141331946,19-03-2001
"
"happier. I'll see the fire don't smoke, if that's any comfort to you.' "
"fast enough, though. They were sick and weary, and they could not go much better "
"     This  was  its fashion,  while Saruman was at  his height, accounted by "
"that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and "
alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not know your peril.' 
On  they  went.  Gandalf  was  quite  right:  they  began  to  hear  goblin  noises  and 
works  of  hand  the  hearts of  the  Dwarves of  the  Lonely Mountain  were 
"What would you know, Master Peregrin?' "
"You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land, "
"####-that it still is  lost. But what was lost may yet be  found, he thinks. Fear "
"and witless here and there, flinging away their weapons, crying out in fear, "
plainly annoyed the Shirriff-leader. The west wind had shifted northward and 
"     'Who will laugh, I wonder?' said Gandalf, shaking his head. "
 
"reckoning, we haven't dealt with a tithe of them yet. But it's  dark now.  I "
"truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had  no one to talk  "
"more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under  "
"bringing back  all the old furniture  and gear, so that  the  old hole  soon "
spoke of their departure. 
up!' 
     The river -bed  was now some way  below the path. They scrambled down to 
"     He opened  the  bundle. Frodo  looked in  disgust at  the contents, but "
"did not think so. Did  you hear  them, Legolas? Did they  sound to you  like "
"     'Where did you come  by  tha t, Sam?' asked Pippin.  'I've  never  heard "
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the 
horrible  growing sense of a  hostile will  that  strove with great power to 
"planted  his big toes (and they  were indeed  big, and very  broad)  on  the "
"Minas Tirith  looked  on, unable to hinder it. And as each  length of trench "
"lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use "
"your  young friends  from talking too much. Drink , fire,  and chance-meeting "
"Ilaire Gofton,4041374457646,22-07-1979
"
"you servants of the Lord, blind in your obedience, that but  for the treason "
"     'Yes, alas! through  him the  Enemy has learned that the One  has  been "
     Sing all ye people! 
you'll find a golden ring.' 
"Peter Feaviour,4041593557812,12-01-1980
"
"Roley Bosma,4041590716643,11-04-1975
"
"     Bells  wer e ringing far  below, and all men  fled  before  the face  of "
noise that even hobbits would  hear. Even the wild things in  the fields and 
"three  lines of flat stepping-stones  across  the  stream,  and between them "
beyond even the words of  the Elven-tongue  to tell. And I love  you. Once I  
"     'Well, what do you think of it?' asked Merry coming up the passage. 'We "
Just  at  that  moment  the  wolves  trotted  howling  into  the  clearing.  All  of  a 
house and tell him all about the Shire.' 
"dwarves,  four  more!  And  there  was  Gandalf  behind,  leaning  on  his  staff  and "
bodies 
doubt  my  tale? Or have you no wits left? I did  not enter this way. I came 
of the  dwarf above all the  tumult.  'The Orcs are in  the Deep!' he cried. 
"Malorie Guidone,4017951543930256,15-02-1996
"
thought  of  the  jewels  of  the  dwarves  shining  in  dark  caverns.  Suddenly  in  the 
     'Ride on! Ride on!'  cried Jomer. 'Too late now to turn aside. The fens 
"Nichol Sharman,4017951747990551,29-11-1995
"
     `But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages 
westward  heights  and  great  shadows crept down  the mountain-sides.  Dusk  
"     'In  happy hour  you  have returned to  us, Gandalf,'  cried the Dwarf,  "
gloomily. 'And that'll take a lot of time and work.' 
the  rest of us. And I  came to help them; but now  they must be hundreds of 
"     Suddenly  as they drew nearer  a terrific baying and barking broke out, "
mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since  
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril 
"####-Marshes  I followed  it,  and  then I had him.  Lurking by a  stagnant mere, "
     After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt  their way 
"Deina Eeles,4041599431300544,12-10-1990
"
"G and the elf-rune, . "
"Jomer:  H®rin the Tall Warden of  the Keys, and the Lord of  Lossarnach, and "
"Aldous Kinleyside,4017950334086,11-04-1992
"
"Elessar, the Elfstone, D®nadan, the heir of Isildur Elendil's son of Gondor. "
"     With his  last failing senses Frodo  heard cries,  and it seemed to him "
"They shaped and wrought, and light they caught "
"pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll, and his "
by all but the most watchful eyes: possible at least for one  who was strong 
"Thorsten Defrain,4041596031674,09-10-1994
"
"     'It may, and it  may  not,' said Gandalf. 'I should not make use of it, "
"fashion.  Not far from  this tunnel there is, or was for  a  long time,  the "
"what  are  your  names?  I  don't  want  your  service  just  now,  only  your  names;  and "
"####-That's  how  they  all  came  to  start,  jogging  off  from  the  inn  one  fine  morning "
driving the enemy from the Gate. 
"The  night became less  dark,  light enough  for them to  see, or  half see, "
all  that  he  thought  so  strong and  magnificent  must  have  been almost 
     Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The black  
this guest.  It is said  that  when the Eorlingas  came out of the North and 
The  little  moon  was  dipping  to  the  horizon.  Evening  was  coming  on.  Then 
"Myca Dodwell,4041378107890,25-12-1990
"
"defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has "
seemed  to  be still  standing on guard by  the closed door.  Frodo breathed 
you say?' 
on the other side. It will not help  us to keep so secret that we are frozen 
"was breathed,  brought blindness not only  to the  eyes but to the mind,  so "
with great care. They drew long and elaborate family -trees with  innumerable 
"Liv Coverley,4041377813272320,16-08-1993
"
"     ` ""I can't abide changes,"" said he, ""not  at my time of life, and least  "
"tiring, but now he looked up and halted. "
"with some difficulty, and pressed forward, as evening fell, on the last stage of their "
moment  there was a sharp twang. Legolas  had  loosed his bow.  There  was a  
"of  some fifteen hundred feet,  lay  the inner plain stretching away into  a  "
"shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water "
"Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune  that  was as old as  the hills, "
"Shamus Handrock,4041378566543313,25-03-1985
"
"as the rustics name it, he said; or athelas in the noble tongue, or to those "
"     Aragorn  searched the ground in a wide  circle,  but no other traces of "
"     'What! My Bill?' cried Sam. 'Well, I was born lucky, whatever my gaffer  "
"     'And  mine  too,'  said  the  deep  voice. 'Alive and as  captured;  no "
"rowan-tree he halted a  while  with  his  arms stretched out,  and sang, and "
     Sam scrambled  to  his feet.  'Well I  never!' he  said.  'I  must have 
but  the  sun was already sinking low when at  last  they saw a line of tall 
wide  shallow  place  full  of  the  noise  of  stones  and  foam.  The  far  bank  was  steep 
"Gnaws iron, bites steel; "
"Lennie Crackel,4580254206152566,29-10-1979
"
foot anywhere in this country.' 
"realm that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the new age is "
"Matilda Papes,4017958824401,27-10-1990
"
"snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves. "
"Sari Dunston,4041592585897,19-12-1989
"
flung their heavy spears in the air in vain. Over them swooped the eagles; the dark 
"Though sword shall be rusted, "
  
rested and slept without fear upon the ground;  for  their guides would  not 
"watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity.  The feeling "
     `Mustn't do what?' asked Sam in surprise. 
Spring.' 
     'What he had  been doing  he would not say. He only wept and  called us 
"Gannon Livingstone,4041596425132,13-10-1978
"
mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and  listened to 
 
shimmering above gleaming mists;  and looking from their camp on a  low hill 
back. The staff  cracked and broke.  That was  enough for him. Grabbing from 
high upon  his  neck still desperately clung a  tiny  figure-the  body  of a  
his hobbit-hole under The Hill. 
     Then when they had  laid their fallen comrades in a  mound and had sung 
"he  said. `But I don't like leaving it, and that's  a fact.' He  stroked the "
cunning  he grew  ever  higher  in the Lord's favour;  and  he learned  great 
""
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As 
"gone away; as far as I know, for good.'  Some of  the visitors he invited to "
trees' fingers.  
asleep. `I will try.' Wearily he got to his feet. 
that we were all going  to Minas Tirith; for that is what he  would  himself 
"Boycie Libbis,4304199209322861,18-06-1981
"
"the deeds and  perils of  all  the members of the now sundered fellowship, until "
"mind you; and when you  said  go alone, he  said no! lake someone as you can "
"have  answered  your  first  question,  too,""  ended  Gandalf,  and  he  sat  a  long  while "
"town, though not quite right, as we shall see in the end. He sent out his spies about "
far away: 
"while did  they  stop,  and by  that  time  they must have been  right down  in  the very "
In the end Bilbo could think of no plan except to let the dwarves into the secret of 
"dared to pass  through my woods so  freely,'  he went on. 'Only lately did I "
and dark things silent crept beneath. 
     For he don't need his shinbone.' 
"Baudoin de Keyser,4041373833870243,01-07-2000
"
"stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and "
"enemies was dense  in  the valley,  they sent against  it a shower of arrows, and each "
"Farly Ohlsen,4017959893876,24-03-1977
"
was 
produce him.' 
"Doom hung over  them, but they faced it silently. "
"south-east, the  direction that they wished  to take; but towards the end of "
"Lura Harriman,4041598809432,17-12-1981
"
"""I'm  always  last  and  I  don't  like  it,""  said  Bombur.  ""It's  somebody  else's  turn "
disliked much  the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship 
from Bree  that the  art  of smoking  the genuine weed sprea d  in the recent 
     Chapter 1   Minas Tirith  
"years  would not  suffice.""  Alas!  poor Boromir. Does  that  not  tell  you  "
"come in sight of the last craggy ridge. 'I must rest  now, Sam, and sleep if "
rich  folk  that  have  more  than  they  can  enjoy  suddenly  lose  something  that  they 
Lindir. `Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other  
"     After they had eaten,  Goldberry  sang many songs for them, songs  that "
did 
"headless door, two huge  standing  stones. He could not remember having seen "
"western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various "
"opened in the world  of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the black  "
"     'Well,  Master, we could at  least go further from this dangerous place "
"     'I wonder if they  think of us at all,' he said, 'and what is happening "
     in every wood in every spring 
"     'Look at it, Mr. Frodo!'  said  Sam. 'Look  at it!  The wind's changed. "
"     'The Chamber of  Records,' said Gimli. `I  guess that is  where we  now "
"     `He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely. "
"Cindee Joannet,4464398524086,11-12-1987
"
"####-Suddenly they heard  the water again, loud now,  rushing and  splashing. All "
""
"cricket.  There  were  thousands  of  them,  and  they  squeaked all  round, "
"There Pippin went  up  much in  the esteem of Bergil,  for when he spoke his "
don't like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe -men to one Ent: 
"Clerc Cancellor,4041596075945,05-12-1981
"
before Thjoden's seat.' 
"'Fool  of a Took!  '  he growled. 'This  is a serious journey,  not a hobbit "
"     Beregond looked at him  gravely. 'An old campaigner,  I see,'  he said. "
"     'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on "
"white one at their head,' he  said.  `Then  we'd break  a way into this evil "
"     The light faded, and  the leaves on the bushes  rustled softly. Clearer  "
"`There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.' "
waistcoat. 
"     Day  came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless  ridges of Ered "
"and fade from midnight until dawn. Something is happening up there."" "
####-down an echoing stairway overhead. 
fitted well upon his  round head; and  a small  shield he also took. It bore 
"     When  every guest had been  welcomed  and was finally inside the  gate,  "
"     'I wonder?  '  said Aragorn.  `He is  the Bearer, and  the fate  of the "
woods. A few eagles were still circling and sweeping above the battle-ground. The 
"the drum-beats  again: they now sounded muffled and  far away, but they were "
"that day, and I was as weary as my horse;  and I needed to consider matters.  "
had come so  far: Anduin  fl ows faster  than I thought.  Sarn Gebir must  be 
####-we shall stand?' 
night.' 
except some great empty jars and broken pots. 
"The white water flowing, "
"still running  along, deeper and deeper into the mountain,  back towards the "
"####-while, until the evening meal is set.' "
that  flying  from the Shire  would mean  more painful partings than  merely 
     'A  struggle  somewhat grimmer  for  my  part than  the  battle of  the 
""
"hear. He writhed, and tried to get his mouth to his ankle and bite the rope.  "
"nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was  a ship, wrought  and carved "
"the thought of Frodo  and the monster  smote upon Sam's mind. He spun round, "
"in to see you, or take a message.' "
"Ashley Dagless,4337261182714646,15-07-1980
"
climbed 
"Jessalyn Hardman,4136101661385,20-05-1996
"
Primeroles  and anemones were awake in the  filbert -brakes; and asphodel and 
"him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song. "
"ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.' "
"visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had done. "
dominion. There they laid their burdens; and some threw themselves down at once 
and  smaller  than  the  bearded Dwarves. Hobbits  have  no  beards. There  is  little  or 
"     'And this  is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the  One had "
"Vi Ledes,4017952548816,03-05-1986
"
 
"neither over the mountains, nor round them, but  under them. That  is a road "
he cried . 'Light  and now  water!' Then he stopped. 'Let me  drink first Mr. 
"     For Sunday* there's a special pair, "
     Now let the song begin! Let us sing together 
     Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go 
"shapes: straight  or bent,  twisted, leaning,  squat  or slender, smooth  or  "
opening on to a  narrow lane.  There they  halted and adjusted the straps of 
glinted. 'Did I not openly proclaim  my  title before  the doors  of Edoras?  
"hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins of silver running "
     He was not  really  in any doubt. He knew  that he must go  down to the 
into a vast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great  horn  was blown 
He does not want to see them. He does not want  them to be. Smjagol wants to 
"deep  eyes  were now  surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating. "
if I may.' 
"looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught "
"     'Is  this  your work  also, Gandalf,  my  friend?'  said Thjoden.  'You  "
looking back wistfully to  the  shore. The sunlight  glittering on the water  
"     `Haven't you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'What's the time? Seems "
"prove too  perilous, though the  Road is less easy than it was, and it  will "
"     Little of all this,  of  course, reached the ears of  ordinary hobbits. "
down on a doorstep and began to weep again. 
fashion; but  I got through the hedge and walked along the  field inside.  I 
"tidings,  and great weariness is  on him, or  I would wake him. His name  is "
"was removed from them, and walked afar  in some dark vale,  calling  for one "
"came to the path and found  that it was broad, paved with broken rubble  and  "
"of them and to the left of the path, and when at last they had drawn level with it, it "
     Bad news has reached me here.  I must go  off at  once. You  had better 
"It  had  a  perfectly  round  door  like  a  porthole,  painted  green,  with  a  shiny "
the bellowing of beasts to my ears.' 
"they won't do anything nasty to him."" "
company  is  against me.  What  do  Legolas and  the  little  folk  say? The 
"horse-road. Very many, mor e than Horse-men.' "
"West-gate and on  towards  the  Shire. Bill the  pony was with them, and  as "
"green shores of the lake. The wise will stay here and hope to rebuild our town, and "
"power of their new  master is great enough, so that the mere shadow  of  His "
"all up, if I was fifty times as big, and Smaug as tame as a rabbit."" "
"Kerri Vaen,4017951759750786,09-12-1985
"
quietly sitting on the floor. 
"chamber in  the tower. There stood  the king, dark  against a narrow window, "
"But  I agree about bed and breakfast.  I  like eggs with my ham, when starting on a "
####-am up! You will not need such arguments. ' 
"Fran Covill,4041378073486493,12-12-1986
"
"""Thorin  Oakenshield,  at  your  service!  Dori  at  your  service!""  said  the  two "
"     The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there they "
"if ever they went a little downward, always the further slope was longer and "
"Elvyn Wissby,4041378261361953,03-09-1989
"
I pity even his slaves.' 
"were here, he would answer all your  questions. And since  he was already at "
suppose they've ever  heard  of hobbits down  here. I suppose I  ought to be 
"bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.' "
Baggins in particular.' 
"anything there is to know about those caves."" "
"that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed.  "
     'Say not so!' said Gimli. 'There are  countless things still to see  in 
""
"Chance Shallcroff,4235993723046,11-11-1978
"
"Tyler Ducker,4054197895041,10-01-1978
"
forth; and then with a rush and rumble of stone it fell in a flurry of fire; 
small dark shape slipping behind a  tree-trunk. He opened his mouth to speak 
forward 
""
"growing things, except as far as they serve him for the  moment.  And now it "
"     They  looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his coming; "
 
"skilled and deadly.  The outstretched neck she clove asunder,  and the  hewn "
"large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,  "
"line. That is a line  of trees,' said Merry, 'and that must mark  the  Road. "
"     'I  do not know  for what  reason the Enemy is pursuing you,'  answered "
"they  talked,  or hummed a  tune  softly together, being  now far  away from "
"Cosette Adamolli,4041591683559588,15-06-2001
"
many windows. Bilbo  huddled in a cloak stood silent  on the doorstep beside 
the voice of Eorl crying  above the battle upon the  Field of Celebrant; and 
"number  of  strangers  into  their little land. One  of  the  travellers,  a  "
parchment rather like a map. 
"mountains,  and  of  riding  swift  across  the  lands  beyond.  They  had  thought  of "
"     Sam clicked his tongue, but restrained himself. "
"Rustin Loney,4017958341091,03-06-1988
"
"all  around was empty.  Doom. Grief  at last  wholly overcame them, and they "
of all these  things and trying  in  vain to  bring  his memory down to  his 
themselves in a small and cosy room. There  was a bit of bright fire burning  
from the bank. They  talked for a while as darkness fell on  the forest. Not 
"     Soon  the other horses  came up  and stood quietly  by, as if  awaiting "
"Lanni Lehenmann,4017950562710,09-04-1987
"
"Binni Swarbrick,4041377652342,31-08-1982
"
"rose in him, and his voice rang out, while words of his own came unbidden to "
""
     The  Isengarders  began  to run with a redoubled  pace that  astonished 
set foot over Celebrant.' 
"wing had  passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high "
rung in challenge but in greeting. This was no assault upon the Dark Lord by 
see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What do you seek?' 
"Jarred Cumbers,4017957870892,06-01-1986
"
""
"a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to  reveal the Ring, "
"""What can I do for you, my dwarves?"" he said. ""Kili at your service!"" said the "
you. I was just going out to  set my dogs  on  any strangers. There are some 
"then  began  to burrow, and later to  build,  all round about. That was  the "
"gorgeous dinner."" "
he  was  wrong.  Gollum  did  mean  to  come  back.  He  was  angry  now  and  hungry.  
"     'Not likely,' answered Gandalf, 'though  they came to  the balance of a  "
beds  with  such ease  as can  be contrived in  haste.  But  tomorrow fairer  
"ruefully, 'and I can't be answerable.' "
"and discussed. And if  it is Gandalf,' he added as  an afterthought, 'we can "
stepped ashore again. 
     'Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?' said Gimli. 
"scrambled up, and dropped;  and  then he ran  madly, sword blazing in  hand, "
although the night was already drawing on. 
"Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay.' "
"my right, and none will dare to stand before us!' "
"been corrected. For example, the rune text now corresponds exactly with the runes "
####-ruined and all! What are we coming to?' 
"him,  because  I  heard  him  talking  to  himself.  He  thought  I  really  knew  the  way "
"of  N®menor. Eastward he looked into  wide uncharted lands, nameless plains,  "
"of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as death. 'Long "
nor thward and was gashed by  a deeper  ravine. On the further side it reared 
fell upon all as out from the host stepped  the D®nedain in silver and grey; 
     The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily. 'Now 
Aragorn.  'Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? An evil choice 
"     'I said that  it  was a  hard  choice,' said Aragorn.  'How shall we end "
at us.' 
"Kurtis Sidsaff,4017959627927726,17-10-2000
"
"####-front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents  and pavilions. A special "
long missed.' 
"creep  any  closer,  because  I  began  to  tremble  all over. Then  I  felt "
     At once the  white horse sprang away  and  sped like the wind along the 
with a smile to the din in  the pavilion and to the sounds of merrymaking in 
"Babara Remirez,4017953633625,26-02-1994
"
very near. In a  minute they would reach the top and be on  him. He had taken 
elves  came  laughing  and  talking  into  the  cellars  and  singing  snatches  of  song. 
at least a path that cannot be missed.' 
colourless lips.  
"Otha Arnaudin,4474814968270,30-05-1998
"
glittered like a shimmering glass. 
"Accursed Years! Speed only we ask.  Let us pass, and then come! I summon "
And  at  the end he found that he still had a little of the dust left; so he 
"####-""Stand  by  the  grey  stone  when  the  thrush  knocks,""  read  Elrond,  ""and  the "
"news of any that draw near. Also I would beg of you, if any of you are still young "
"He  said  he would  come  inside  at  least  and  perhaps  a bit of  the way  too,  really  to "
"     And  that was  all, less than  three thousands full told. No more would "
and noon.' 
"Homere Hayward,4041596196675,23-07-1998
"
"hewn, closed at either end with mighty  doors of iron.  They were so wrought "
"shadow  had  passed,  and  a  fair  vision  had visited him in  this land of "
see half a dozen  large ill-favoured Men lounging against the inn-wall; they 
"####-""Now  stop  it!""  said  Tom  and  Bert  together.  ""The  night's  gettin'  on,  and  dawn "
"Grishnbkh. 'You, Lugdush, get two others  and stand guard over them! They're "
"water. All  the  same  it was  like  trying  to  ride, without  bridle  or  stirrups,  a  round-"
"     Treebeard's face became sad. 'Forests may  grow,' he  said.  'Woods may "
"     'It  is no laughing  matter,'  said Gandalf. 'Not for you.  It was  the "
Shire; but I think I need a holiday.' 
""
"     `As you go down the water,' he said, `you will find that the trees will "
"warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes,  and out of the "
"     `And I'd not mind  a glimpse of what's going on at home,' he said in an "
tone of his voice. 
"     `Then take it,' said  the other,  `and let's hold it ourselfs!  Then we "
uneasy more than two days ago. that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out 
"ago. How Shelob came there, flying from ruin, no tale tells, for out  of the "
but  it brings  hope to  me. I will take it as a sign that we may  pass  the 
gold as he put something back in his trouser -pocket. 
hearth; but  Strider settled himself  in the chair against  the  door .  They 
The man was swift and sure-footed. It was not long before Bilbo was set down 
"Delainey Ridgers,4041593661451713,04-10-1983
"
"     'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgyl,' said Gandalf. 'It could have "
"bridge below,  and Frodo's staring eyes followed him,  unable to  wink or to "
"Then  off  he went  from  door  to  door,  until  his  following  had  grown  to  twelve-"
""
him up by the toes and shook him. 
"Frazer Eich,4017959717540033,27-12-1976
"
"Rorie Nerney,4041376735775,16-02-1976
"
and he is hungry. Give us what you have!' 
again-except high and  far off  in  the battle of Five Armies. But as  that comes  in at 
"     `Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo. "
Bilbo  himself  coming  back  towards  them.  His  wits  had  quickly returned soon as 
"     They  waited anxiously for  him to go on. 'Well,' the farmer continued, "
hilt of a sword that had  hung concealed by  his  side. They did not dare to 
huddle  away  from them towards the  brink of the  cliff. The greater number  
"Soon it was nearly dark. The winds broke up the grey clouds, and a waning moon "
"his  knees,  and  his  legs were  covered with  hose  of  a  fine  and  flexible metal mesh, "
"he  had  been  left  behind;  or  why,  if  he  had  been  left  behind,  the  goblins  had  not "
else that I could  do.  I could not take it  from him without doing  greater  
get indoors and then we can talk.' 
"And  of  course  they  did  none  of  these  dreadful  things,  and  everything  was "
'Can horses cross the river?' 
"in our means."" "
"with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the "
"     Then Aragorn laid his hand on Merry's head, and passing his hand gently  "
"(if people were ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable  to  come to the "
"east. The Hunter's Moon waxed round in the  night sky, and put to flight all "
"####-     'Well, if you'd called  for anything else, I'd have been happier,' said "
"and  night, at Gandalf's  bidding,  much  though we wearied of the task. But "
shoe-making; but they had long and skilful fingers and could make many other 
"Randell Fruin,4041371808007,08-08-1986
"
"clear proofs  will  be  required,  should this  Aragorn ever  come  to Minas "
"Gandalf; and Aragorn  knelt,  and Gandalf set the White Crown upon his head, "
and South Ithilien. 
"gaped, and from  deep rifts and pits smoke and fumes leaped up. Behind  them "
and one on either side. Then the light went out. 
days  and  those  wild  parts  they had not  advanced  (as  it  is  called)  so  far. They did 
"     ' ""Butterbur they call him,"" thought I. ""If this delay was his fault, I "
"back to some earlier point, or  jumped forward asking questions  about later  "
"his name, I warn  you, is no longer a password to the king's favour.  He has "
####-armies? And it  is not  always good  to be healed in  body. Nor is it always 
"now."" "
Sunlight  streamed  back again into  the  room. Sam   passed  along the  path  
"narrow place, with a dreadful fall into a dim valley at one side of them. There they "
 
"I want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they  spoke of, they might  "
"them, but looking  back they could see  the twinkle of torches  coming round "
the cool night air. . 
"hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk "
beasts  or  the dreadful cries of tortured things; and he would start  up to 
     Chapter 1   Many Meetings  
morning sun.' 
"     'In the afternoon we walked round the circle,  and  went  to have a look  "
"repeating  it  to his ""precious"" over and  over again, as he gnawed bones in "
     `One for the Shire! '  cried  Aragorn. `The hobbit's bite is  deep! You  
"     'That  is  a  fair lord and a great captain of men,'  said Legolas. 'If "
"""Not fair! not fair!"" he hissed. ""It isn't fair, my precious, is it, to ask us what it's "
anything.' 
"Nissy Cunnow,4032542010629322,24-10-2001
"
riders were out and away. 
"masses and deep  grey shadows loomed above  them and about them, but now "
like before.' 
"it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon.  And I've kept  it safe.  It's round  my "
knew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For the 
watchful malice at the gate: it  was almost more than he could  screw himself 
"Adrian Beirne,4017956556569818,08-01-1981
"
less important affairs 'away south'.  
"Geneva Stable,4041379050342048,25-11-1988
"
"pearl. Then it faded into the West, and dusk came  early, followed by a grey "
""
"####-After  a  while  Gollum  began  to  hiss  with  pleasure  to  himself:  ""Is  it  nice,  my "
"beast  spell-enslaved,  ran  hither  and  thither  mindless;  and  some slew "
dead 
"     `Eight,' said Legolas. `Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom, "
broken. Send for my servants!' He turned back to Faramir. 
"Ernestus Bratcher,4041373663919490,11-09-1988
"
"     `No, we have  got no fish,' said Frodo. `We have only  got this'  -- he "
"Bilbo  was  very  nimble,  he  could  slip  out  just  behind  them;  though  it  was  a "
our doom await us.' 
"Irvin Gorgen,4041375824504699,15-10-1992
"
have come into my inheritance. In token of this I would have the Ring-bearer 
     `Then what would you have me do? ' 
"request only did  Aragorn make to me,' said Jowyn, as  they passed among the "
gloaming  hair  was  twined  with  flowers;  green  and  white  gems  glinted  on  their 
Then  the  dwarves  forgot  their  joy  and  their  confident  boasts  of  a  moment 
it there wheeled and flew many black -winged birds. Some passed overhead 
"     'Well,  the Road won't sweep me  a nywhere for an  hour  at least,' said "
"Weathertop Hill. In that way they  would, if all went well,  cut off a great "
"those  two  young hobbits,  and guard them at  the least, even if you cannot "
"Ford Patient,4489822657196753,17-10-1994
"
"now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you "
an undertone.  'A fine old fellow. Very polite.' 
laughter: so  fair  was  the grace  of Goldberry  and so  merry and odd  the 
desire  neither  of  him.  Indeed if  you wish for  an answer  to your first 
and charged with a great shout. And  from the walls an answering  shout went 
want to see if it is another Black Rider.' 
can't live long on the heights.' 
"very worried, and it's a long tale. But  if you mean to help me, I  ought to "
"     `No, no birds,' said  Gollum.  `Nice birds! ' He licked his  teeth. 'No "
"companies of the enemy were swiftly setting up, each behind  the cover of  a  "
"happen  if he did not. He  felt  sick. The  flight  ended only  just  in  time  for him,  just "
right.  Such  day  as  there  ever  was  in  the  forest  was  fading  once  more  into  the 
Then he ordered  the dwarves  each  to be put  in  a  separate  cell  and  to be given 
with his unaided ears. At the moment the  noise seemed to be coming from the 
deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy hair he is. He 
ourselves.' 
""
"hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we  "
"rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.' "
from their sight. 
"     The  day passed  slowly. A  great thirst troubled  them, but they drank  "
"are very few of them in Bree, and they won't be for sale. But I'll do what I "
     There he halted and sat down. For the moment he could drive himself  no 
"""Valleys have ears, and some elves have over merry tongues. Good night!"" "
"     ' ""The Shire,"" I said; but my heart sank. For even the  Wise might fear "
"rustling. So do we  ever watch the shores  nigh Osgiliath, which our enemies "
"Gustie McLucky,4017959719740888,11-08-1977
"
in  the  days  of their peace and prosperity they  were  a  merry folk. They 
silver and  its roof  of gold. Many Elves were  seated there.  On two chairs 
""
"     'And that we shall not find on the roads to the  Sea,' said Galdor. 'If "
     They had not  gone  far  on  the  fifth day  when  they  left  the last  
"Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and "
     Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat: 
"Becky Hauger,4041370131864,30-05-1982
"
Great tidings! ' But Faramir's face was unmoved. 
"`I had not  overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it "
"     'Lord,  lord,' began Merry brokenly, 'she  is--';  but  at that  moment "
roads long disused and choked with  brambles. These lay usually right across 
     'Did the  verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out 
"Hedge  or  the  valley of  the Brandywine  beyond  it. Northward, where they "
came from robbers.' 
'We might do something with fire!' 
"away,, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied "
"Imrahil,  Prince  of Dol Amroth,  kinsman of the  Lord, with  gilded banners "
"not content, and she wishes to speak to the Steward of the City.' "
"     'Wormtongue?' said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. 'Say no more!  "
"the  High Sea and passed on into the West, until at  last on a night of rain "
"Guinna Gaudon,4041374160646065,26-09-1996
"
"could be told,  and  it  seemed that  they  had  died in pain;  and all were "
thirty feel  below them. The sound of hoofs  drew  nearer.  They were  going  
"fought back with a sudden  fury  that  amazed Sam, and Gollum  also. Even so "
"Thjoden was  left  at  last alone in his barrow, then folk gathered  to  the "
"     'It may,' said Strider. "
Smaug's  left  eye.  He  was  only  pretending  to  sleep!  He  was  watching  the  tunnel 
For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be 
"the afternoon in the third day of their moot,  the Ents suddenly blew up. It "
"other.  `But let the  lads play! No need to worry about  Shelob for a bit, I "
soon 
amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf!' 
tidings to me. 
"already  twinkling,  the  Running  River  came  down  into  the  lake  from  Dale  and "
"realms that  you know not, and  they are hidden from you.  Anduin  the Great "
 
we 
 
wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and  to the west was still 
"Misha Seatter,4041590310923464,23-10-1985
"
"     'Jowyn is safe now,' he said. 'But you, Wormtongue,  you have done what "
"those that  looked on that the  globe began to  glow with an inner flame, so "
"     'Who knows indeed!' said Gandalf. `But there is another way, and not by  "
other  creature.  They are like great  carrion birds. They  are  looking for  
"     By the end of the next day  the pain and  unease had passed, and  Frodo "
"you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over  them. But over the mountains I "
"Leticia Heskey,4017950213494437,25-12-2001
"
 
""
"Georgetta Coad,4017955253091,19-04-1990
"
"coal."" "
"Olivette Scotts,4041378990484001,11-08-1987
"
"would laugh on the Hill at home Still I wish there was a looking-glass handy!"" "
have to go?' 
"first meeting. And if ever I return to the  smithies of my home, it shall be "
"     Now the guests were  ready,  and  they drank the stirrup-cup, and  with "
"Victory  had  been  assured  before  the  fall  of  night,  but  the  pursuit  was  still  on "
"     'Nay, we are too  few to defend the Dike,' said Thjoden. 'It  is a mile "
sniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.' 
"Lanie Foulcher,4041371202023345,24-01-1987
"
"visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, "
"clouds of  smoke,  and the  mountains are troubled. There are noises in  the "
"a tall shapeless fell  bag, which  he called  a hat. In the gloom  he looked "
"south, and from Barad-dyr.  Along all the roads troops were moving; for  the  "
"fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and "
two guesses at once. 
some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not  too great. 
his jewelled belt was of great magnificence. 
"     `Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but I know "
"seemed  to  share  his mind-except perhaps old fat Bombur and Fili and Kili. Bilbo, "
     that washes the weary mud away! 
"day. And upon its out-thrust knee was the Guarded City, with its seven walls "
"Cassie Reek,4041370305419921,27-02-1978
"
"bark  of  snowy white,  and  were leafless  but  beautiful in  their shapely "
"vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He "
"and knives and wooden spoons, which the dogs took and quickly laid on the trestle "
"their hopes were higher; for they had food for some weeks with care-chiefly cram, "
accept  your  service.  For you  are not  daunted  by  words;  and you  have 
to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone. But  I  do not 
their most ancient  legends hardly looked further  back than their Wandering  
"moon  of  Autumn—""  and  perhaps  it  will  be  Durin's  Day""  they  had  said.  Only "
"know it, but he could not think of it. He began to get frightened, and that is bad for "
"orcs  had mastered them, and  they were tormenting Frodo,  or  even savagely "
"stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I "
"less  like  that).  ""Will  he  do,  do  you  think?  It  is  all  very  well  for Gandalf  to  talk "
"his  left hand,  Sam swung it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on "
"     A tall figure loomed up and stumbled over  him, cu rsing the tree-roots.  "
"beyond that, except for a vague hope  that  perhaps  away  beyond the  Downs "
"But  they  answered  nothing.  Some  turned  swiftly  back,  and  the  others  after "
of the Enemy when he comes  to take it.  Which way would any of us choose in 
"ash  and slag and burned stone, out  of which a  sheer -sided cone was raised "
"begun, and was getting hotter. "
"old  times tales tell of, I say. It  isn't safe  on the road and nobody goes "
"him  stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her  "
"     `Luckily our fire made  little smoke,  and  had  burned  low before the "
much;  you must  depend  on  your  luck  and  your  courage  and  the  food  I  send with 
"after them came the Lady Galadriel and Celeborn,  Lord of Lothlurien, riding "
"above him, and then pitifully he began to crawl forward on his hands.  "
drifting  cloud. A chill wind` blew from the East. Night was gathering  over  
"Helm's horn,  and I  will ride forth.  Will  you ride  with me then, son  of "
the most famous gardener in history; and you will read things out of the Red 
"dreadful voice, speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power and  terror "
"unnecessary risks!"" "
pinecones  from  the  branches  of  his  tree.  Then  he  set  one  alight  with  bright  blue 
     Day came pale from the East. As the light grew  it filtered through the 
"and  up,  and  it  seemed  to  the  hobbit  that  a  silence  began  to  draw  in  upon  them. "
"Michal Huniwall,4041375932206963,13-05-1989
"
"west of the mountains, where once you walked long ago.' "
""
"you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt,  no there-and -back journey.  "
"     Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had  since he "
"     'But we may  have some to do,' said  Sam. 'And there's knives and stray "
"purpose.  Something has  crept, or has  been driven out of dark waters under  "
"desiring and hating it. Senses, too, there are other  than sight or smell. We "
been sent.' 
     Sam  sat down heavily with a red face.  Faramir turned to Frodo  again: 
"filled a  little bare pool,  from which again it spilled, and vanished  then "
"     'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I "
"gifts  and  ample  help,  and  led  us  to  believe  that  old  songs  could  come  true? Who "
"Pippy Debnam,4360227983818860,13-07-1978
"
"Woodie Hindshaw,4041591489984,23-11-1988
"
"cunning. My lord,  if your sister's love for you, and her will still bent to "
"Rudy Espinosa,4041598188058396,05-07-1989
"
"in the sun, which was now strong and warm, they were refreshed, if still sore and a "
beyond the ends of the world. 
"     three or four  tall black  figures  were standing  there  on the slope, "
"     'Coming,  sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out  of  a door, "
"Keenan Pengelly,4043366957717685,28-01-1979
"
"Barliman, but  every  little  helps. You  can let  Mr. Underhill  stay  here "
"Ferne Soldan,4041373383488,21-07-1999
"
     They  followed their enemies now  by the clear light  of day. It seemed 
that you will be punctual. 
 
have sent this thing hither to  your keeping  and  spared myself and  others 
cord lying nearby!' 
"should find this thief,"" such  was  his word, ""and get from him, willing  or  "
discovering the time of night. 
"shall  not wholly  fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything "
"""I  have  always  understood,""  said  Bilbo  in  a  frightened  squeak,  ""that  dragons "
"Ents may  be worth a song.  Aye,'  he sighed, 'we may help the other peoples "
"Presently his breath was hissing softly through his clenched  teeth,  hut he "
say so.' 
 
always  thinking  of  the  answer. But  he  could  not  remember  anything  better  at  the 
"     'I have  no help  to send,  therefore I must  go myself,'  said Aragorn. "
answered.  'A  year shall I endure  for every  day  that passes  until  your 
thwart me? Choose swiftly!' 
close at hand already.' 
"horses. This  only I ask: when  your quest is achieved, or  is  proved vain, "
swift and strong beneath; and at the far end were gates before the mouth of a huge 
"it is recorded, is it not, Gimli? ' "
"""By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse him for his choice of "
come through  and journey on down  into the South.  Instead each of us  must  
"in the side of a  low  hill, at some  little height above  a long trenchlike "
     'tis evil in the Wild to fare. 
"Benjamin Meynell,4017952926509,04-02-1999
"
you shall not rob your son of his choice while his death is still in doubt.' 
"black serpent upon  scarlet, he  came against the white  horse and the green "
""
the  light  of the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to  meet them 
prudent. I do not counsel prudence. I said  victory could not be achieved by 
Orthanc; and he found me standing  on the pinnacle. Then I  spoke to him and 
     The tenth  day of their journey  was over.  Wilderland was behind them. 
####- 
"crown.  The  Dark Lord was suddenly  aware of him, and  his Eye piercing all "
"Darsie Lightoller,4017950275610,14-05-1976
"
"matters,' he said.  'For this  is not the first  halfling that  I  have seen "
"mighty warrior, a giant among the Swertings. "
"were clear  at  any rate that  Ugl®k and  his troop  came from Isengard, and "
"and Gandalf, who went in the  van with the D®nedain  and the sons of Elrond. "
"     Thus began  the Shire-reckoning, for the year  of  the  crossing of the "
"Gandalf, coming  suddenly to  life and turning  round.  `Unless  things  are "
There was a hurrying sound of many feet. 
good 'preservation':  outwardly he retained the appearance  of a  robust and 
the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.' 
"Bartolemo Tombs,4703190192240,14-04-1981
"
"pleaded, 'There is another way. O  yes indeed there is. Another way. darker, "
"Lee Leven,4809798686648,23-04-2001
"
him from afar and pierced his heart. 
     It came to the edge of the fire and the  light faded as if a cloud  had 
rising swiftly to a piercing pitch beyond the range of hearing.  The hobbits 
"whither you wish to go,  and  what  to do.  For I  must watch, and  wait, and "
Elvenhome. But in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days 
"intent upon the woman before him, heeded him no more than a worm in the "
"Deva Gabotti,4912940247945,04-09-1992
"
"place under the warm bank in  Captain  Faramir's  country, the  day I saw an "
"Ashien Gethen,4041375176609,10-08-1980
"
fall. 
####-     A mist of silver quivering. 
"Georgeanne Gravenall,4017952120287052,16-04-1992
"
"Magdalena Donnellan,4017958498313,11-09-1976
"
""
"was Gil-galad,  Elven-king and Elendil  of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron, "
he had  never mor e than half believed  it. Even now he  looked  at the stone 
"was  a regrettable misunderstanding,  long set right. If  all the grievances "
to  keep it safe but I've  forgotten to ask if the smiths  could mend it. No 
"a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see "
"fine supper, ""not when he was skinned and boned."" "
yes.' 
"####-hoped you would manage it. Well,  well! So  all this  feasting  is  in  your "
"Katey Boatwright,4041593860236881,18-05-1996
"
was morning. Orders were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass.  
"     'You have  spoken more than enough,  Ugl®k,' sneered the evil voice. 'I  "
"son. And for a moment, while all were silent and still, watching the Lord in "
departure then?' 
"purpose. It was  then ten  days since the Ring-bearer went east from Rauros,  "
"and far up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and cold. "
"forebode,  is not free now from peril;  and these two I had thought to  send "
"     'There is no  news of the Rohirrim,' he said. 'Rohan will not come now.  "
Frodo's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.' 
Aragorn!' 
the  West.  Then a wide river flowing through a  populous city. Then a white  
was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in. 
"will be good for  business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.' "
"     On the morning of the last day Frodo  was alone with Bilbo, and the old "
     It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into  halting words.  
for all - this very month as is.' 
hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil were mustered in Arnor. 
doom do you bring out of the North?' 
"slept  unquietly,  turning and  tossing,  and sometimes murmuring. Twice Sam "
"     'Don't talk about it, Mr. Frodo. Bless you! I'd  carry you  on my back, "
the  spell endured when they were  far away. and ever  they heard that  soft  
"who was standing lost in thought, looking at the pale lights. His hands hung "
Forlong!' 
"beautiful;  and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of  Gondor upon the "
"Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller. "
"over the Shire,  for a year  and a day,  and was remembered much longer than "
"     When they had called many times, at last  the Gate-keeper came out, and "
"     'Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid. "
"man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. 'But  most of them have seen "
"these were  fair houses set apart, for the care of those who were grievously "
""
"     Down the face of a precipice, sheer  and almost smooth it seemed in the "
dwarves as they went along. 
"prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on  "
     'Long live the Halflings! Praise them with great praise! 
"wealth, so  also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and  too "
"that time their cloaks, blankets, water , food, and other gear already seemed "
here. I am that torn in two.' 
steeds  were no match  in  speed for the  white elf-horse of  Glorfindel. He 
####-found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft than such arrows 
up.' 
"wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as Orcs, and much bigger. Smjagol "
the secret of whose making was possessed by Dain's people. 
"####-gaining on him; already he was some twenty strides ahead, flitting on like a  "
"     'Are we riding far tonight,  Gandalf?'  asked  Merry after  a while. 'I  "
"that  the goblins were crushed,  it seemed safer  to  them  than  the dreadful pathways "
"     `Yess,  yess,  nice water,' said  Gollum. `Drink it, drink it, while we "
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.' 
"     'I wish  I had  waited  for  Gandalf,' Frodo  muttered. 'But perhaps it "
branches; but  they  all got  an uncomfortable feeling that they were  being 
"slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had "
"Tired as he was, Bilbo would have liked to stay awhile. Elvish singing is not a "
"     'You can see and feel it everywhere,' said Frodo. "
"Westbrook Kruse,4017954237162079,11-05-1987
"
"first building,' said  Gimli. 'It is ever so with the things that Men begin: "
went 
still he was no nearer to a choice. 
"in  his  bones  for  the  homeward  journey. That,  however, was  a  little  delayed, so  in "
"     his home through shadows journeying, "
"Jerrylee Firminger,4041593067739943,15-04-1980
"
"been  deeper in.  But  better times are  coming. Maybe,  better than any you  "
was aware that they had  passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard 
"clinging grip, soft  but  horribly  strong, was  squeezing  him  like slowly  "
Glamdring at his side. 
"are  scaling the bank at many  points,  thick as marching ants. But we  have "
things much now. And I had something else to do.' 
naked trees. A wind began to  blow  chill  from  the  Misty Mountains to the 
"Tova Cardwell,4041593548829,24-02-1994
"
lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here st ill?  ' 
     As  they crossed the bridge  and looked up the Hill  they  gasped. Even 
enthusiasm  still  lasted  in  the  town was  the  time  to get help.  It would not do  to  let 
"Ruperto Dyton,4041595052236876,31-10-1988
"
into  two  there  marched  a double  line of unshaped standing  stones  that 
"backs  turned to the  wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled "
"night."" "
he thought. 
queer.  And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with it any 
And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill by the river and came right 
"deserted,  for many men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to  "
rock whose  huge out-thrust bulk  divided in two all the circles of the City 
"     'How Old  Toby came by  the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day "
"Filip Wimbury,4041595617473,14-05-2000
"
will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.' 
"bring them over  the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and  down into the Land of "
"     'Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. 'Saruman  has long spied out "
Morannon. 
"do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,' retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller even "
"     About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time, but it "
of his race. 
""
"News must  get through to Lugb®rz, or we'll both be for the Black Pits. Yes, "
     Of stars in shadow shimmering. 
"limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a  horrible speed, "
"rank with weeds. Worse,  there was a whole line  of the ugly new houses  all "
"Amii Bloor,4041371047691595,19-04-1987
"
"""We  have  none,""  said  Thorin,  and  it  was  true  enough:  their  knives  had  been "
"Pam Van den Hof,4017951291584685,21-01-2000
"
     'Why weren't  you there?' cried Frodo.  `And why haven't I been allowed 
the  words  of  the  wizard  to  Elrond.  It  appeared  that  Gandalf  had  been  to  a  great 
After that of course the dwarves begged his pardon. 
in this land.  I distrust the  silence. I  distrust even  the pale Moon. The 
"####-sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears.  'Curse "
     in their own secret tongues he spoke. 
     ar ilyl tier undulbvl lumbull; 
"Hedda McAloren,4555437305842952,19-07-1997
"
"trees offered little  protection, except concealment.  Orcs were  as keen as "
"Then the elves put thongs on him, and shut him in one of the inmost caves with "
Gandalf  had  had  of  them.  Great  floods  and  rains  had  swollen  the  waters  that 
meet the wolves. They gave  back before him. High in  the air he  tossed the 
whose command do you hunt Orcs in our land?' 
backs to  the willow-trunk.  Behind them  the  great  cracks gaped  wide  to 
"they became cold, grim as  ice, and quiet.  They left the plain and gathered "
"     He  stood up and looked about,  but he saw nothing that was of any use. "
even then.  Skinbark  lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is 
####-of that  which has already been left far behind by  the  flowing  streams of 
"Men. South and east they stared to where, at the edge of the oncoming night,  "
"     `The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,' Gollum whined. `Not  under the "
"     'But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are  so  dull,' they "
"     Merry  led the pony  over a gangway  on to  the ferry,  and the  others "
"in  Sammath Naur the  very heart  of his realm, the Power  in  Barad-dyr was "
to  the  point. Bag End seemed a more  desirable residence than  i t  had for 
""
"fear was in Pippin's heart,  yet at the  same time he was wondering what use "
"Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand. "
"But he's got you, you nassty filthy little sneak!' He spat on Sam's neck. "
"quite enough to explain his 'hastiness', at least in the matter of Orcs. "
northward road ere the  Gate was  shut. They were the remnant of  the  guard 
"Darlleen Bartels-Ellis,4041379020924248,11-08-1983
"
     'Where  is that miserable Lotho hiding?' said Merry. They  had searched 
"Leonard Damsell,4041378063440,20-10-1975
"
was but one and not the greatest of the hosts that Mordor now sent forth. 
"Ardisj Crouse,4041379389497,26-08-1985
"
"deep night-shadows about their feet,  standing  like sentinel pillars at the "
"all see  him standing,  waving  one hand in  the air,  the other  was in his "
"     They waded  the  stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown "
to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.' 
"Merill Pauleit,4017959155342,08-06-1997
"
"Glenden Roads,4041590091634165,16-12-1983
"
"     'Hobbits!' he thought. 'Well, what next? I have heard of strange doings "
"     Frodo looked a t her questioningly.  'He is, as you  have seen him,' she "
"Sting, this  may  turn out  better than  I hoped. And anyway it looks  as if "
"William Wraight,4041372768761294,26-07-1988
"
"     'No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,' said Frodo. `We "
"     'I did not,' said Frodo. 'But I might  have guessed.  A little mischief "
     When young was mountain under moon; 
"     `Whatever  it may be,'  said Pippin,  `they  will be  marvellous  trees "
the Orcs and the soldiers of the Enemy. Not even the cloaks of  Lurien would 
"rocks echoed then with voices and with song, as they had not done for many a day. "
"inclined to tell the truth, even if he waits a hundred years.'"" "
"made such an awful noise, and how Bilbo had escaped. "
""
seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world. 
"Lianna Robart,4991806134021255,18-08-1976
"
neither of us isn't going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first.' 
"blowing and swaying in  the breeze. Out of the  shadows the  hobbits peeped, "
"himself  was one. But  he also knew that  it could not see him-not yet,  not "
"it shone like silver in the firelight, like water in the sun, like snow under the stars, "
"afar. Foaming water, green and white, rushed and curled about its knees. "
I  was not gentle. Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks 
"grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!' "
"""There's more  to come yet,"" said Tom, ""or I'm mighty mistook. Lots and none "
"others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if "
thrice a day the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none 
questioned.' 
only. For that  they had  found no  cure; and indeed the span of their lives 
"people  were  struck  by  lightning  in  the  cave,  when  we  invited  these  creatures  to "
greasy surfaces of the sullen waters. Dead grasses  and rotting reeds loomed 
innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at long last to 
     'Come now!' said Jomer. 'The Heir of Elendil would be a strength indeed 
stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the dark water. 
"questioned  me until I thought I should go mad, standing  over me, gloating,  "
"The moon set sail upon the gale, "
find a  way. 
Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.' 
"mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under the light of day!' "
     Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Jomer.  'You have the 
"Company, blotting out  all  light as it approached. Soon  it  appeared as  a  "
"people of Westfold, old and young, women and children, who had come out "
"yes,  a  Baggins.  A  Baggins  stole it. He  found it  and  he said nothing, "
"""I am nearly dead of it,"" said Bilbo in a weak little voice that nobody heard. "
after listening for a while they set off eastward at a steady pace. 
have never seen or  heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf 
"of  him.  ""I  have  absolutely  no  use  for  dragon-guarded treasures, and the whole lot "
"till hair smells and skins crack, "
####-North  of  the Carrock  the  edge  of Mirkwood  drew  closer  to  the  borders  of  the 
with joy. And then he cast the leaves into the bowls  of steaming water that 
woodland flowers. In his hand he held a carven staff of oak. 
hand. 
####-<h4>Chapter 11</h4> <br> 
"Marie-jeanne Rebillard,4017959317359834,09-09-1984
"
"     'The cutting of the bands on your wrists,  that was smart  work!'  said "
"kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless  of  his own  feet. A hardly "
right up in the top chamber.' 
"fair, it was now filled with pits and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in "
falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully; but  they did 
"Bobbi Zaniolini,4017953991380059,19-07-1983
"
tales.' 
"     He  sat  down upon the stone  and cupped his chin in his hands, staring "
in  darkness.  Then  Bilbo  heard  the  king's  butler  bidding  the  chief  of  the  guards 
Rivendell.' 
"Austine Craythorn,4041597858768623,18-03-1994
"
"great  curve of  Anduin, still shrouded in  mists, towards the Emyn Muil and "
"     Cold be hand and heart and bone, "
"Melloney Dirkin,4537947115470144,14-04-1999
"
keep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know.' 
Dwarf-kingdom.  He  was delighted  to have found  so polite a  listener; for  
"     It  seemed then to Gandalf,  intent, watching  him as a  man engaged in "
"designed and made by  him; and the  special effects, set pieces, and flights "
And so they parted. And though the lord of the eagles became in after days the 
"use nearer than the water -side,' said Gimli. "
the worst at once.' 
     'To Isengard!' 
"     'Nothing can  we see to guide us here,' said Gimli. 'Well, now we  must  "
"now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At  once. Go and get ready, and  "
"that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way "
"Arabel Gration,4041590435107456,11-12-1982
"
"to health and hope, so valiant a lady!' "
of them. 
and Isildur as they stand carven in their majesty in  the halls of Denethor. 
"fir-trees of the furthest  ridge there rose, sharp and white, the peak of  a  "
ground and with his whole force hurled himself backwards. 
"faith, and so persuaded me. "
sweet-tongued. But I see you are an elf-friend; the light  in your eyes  and 
"     Frodo had been in the battle, but he had not drawn sword, and his chief "
"strange  shape, high-crowned,  with long cheek -guards  close-fitting to  the "
"their dwarvish hearts; and when the heart of a dwarf, even the most respectable, is "
to him in Rohan! But whence this message came they are now in doubt. 
""
"     'Yes, yes,' agreed Gollum, skipping about. 'Off we go! There's only one "
wondering how to make owl-noises before they throttled him. 
shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye.' 
in the dark was not easy for the little hobbit. He was nearly across when he missed 
"""Now  is  the  time  for  our  esteemed  Mr.  Baggins,  who  has  proved  himself  a "
"me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he "
"upon Aragorn, and the others  saw that she  was in great torment of mind. At  "
"begin to go down the other side at this rate."" And the others were thinking equally "
"     That day it seemed to Sam that his master  had found some new strength,  "
     'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you'  said 
"and it will  mend in time, if she  ha s  the  strength  to live:  It  is  the "
"upon the wall,  and  the patrols before the gate. They lay now peering  over  "
"Elmore Prall,4041598668317999,17-04-1982
"
telling  any  one  there  'anything  that  was  not  known  already.  But  he  was  rudely 
"insolence shall be mine again for ever."" "
     By light of moon and ray of star 
"Darb Prinne,4041373454081,02-09-1976
"
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament  for a  
"Eudora Conring,4130534130627253,23-04-1989
"
"Merlina Benedito,4041376521941275,24-06-1999
"
"ourselves?  We're in sight of  the pass, of a way in, and  if we can find it "
"last strength she drove her sword between  crown and  mantle, as  the  great "
"Christos Sainteau,4041372588152807,11-06-1987
"
Farewell!' 
"boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning!  ' "
"####-     'There!' he  cried  after  a moment, drawing his hand  across his brow.  "
servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight  
"and the Mountain are more than big enough tasks for you!"" "
he  said.  `Not a  hobbit.'  Suddenly  he turned  back.  A  green  light was 
"of the water went on, never changing its note, morning or evening  or night.  "
"And ever as they talked Beregond  was more amazed,  and looked with  greater  "
He took his peril with him? ' 
"strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf should  forge the steel or the hand  "
"Gayel Waberer,4041596236852828,23-09-1987
"
"be  seen. 'Well,  here we  are again at  last!'  said  Frodo.  'I suppose  we "
"on to his fingers  and head,  and  dripped, dripped, in  hundreds  of silver "
"city, a faint cry would come,  and  many who heard  it  would stand stricken "
""
"Pippin.  'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell  "
"     'We know many things,'  they said. 'We have seen you often before  with "
"poured out  hissing and  foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping  hole "
"soft bed after a good supper!"" "
round again with shining  eyes and dancing  on  the floor. 'It's fine to see 
"far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head. 'No,' he  said "
his foolish webs before  the feet of Sauron the Great. I have  tokens that I 
turning  out  the  dining-room. By  that  time  the sun was shining; and  the front door 
"""Go  away!  little  boys!""  shouted Gandalf  in  answer.  ""It  isn't  bird-nesting time. "
"Erny Hampshaw,4041591669650,18-02-1989
"
"breakfast to revive him. So he sat himself down with his back to a tree, and not for "
"Ingram Elsom,4017953727384029,26-07-1997
"
terrible desert. There could be no return. 
answered Strider. 'The  Men of  the West  did not live here; though in their 
"you had waited at Orthanc, you would have seen  him, and he would have "
"tree stood  mournfully above  them, its  dry  leaves now hanging  limp,  and  "
"     'Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheled-zvram, and cold  are the  springs  of "
"owls.  Soon  he  began  to  nod  with  sleep  and  the  voices  seemed  to  grow  far  away, "
"behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune. "
"when he stopped  quaking, that I embraced  the old fellow. How it happened I "
"to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he  took  it, but he looked  intently at "
"Moyra Have,4017958232605,11-11-1988
"
where Combe lay; 
     'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?' 
"was anxious, and  the host was in peril.  They were less than a  day's  ride "
"awkward,  like folk that, knocking at a  cottage door to  beg for a drink of "
necessaries and the ponies for their own use that had been sent to meet them. They 
"Lona Jedryka,4017951982917,19-07-1988
"
The day  after  the battle with  the  spiders Bilbo  and  the dwarves made one  last 
"welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while  "
     'You are Peregrin the Halfling?' he said. 'I am told that you have been 
"Renate Swallwell,4809677986275,13-01-1998
"
"     For  a while the three companions walked together, speaking of this and "
Frodo. 
were  set;  on  the  Eastern  spur  were men  and  dwarves.  But  Bard  and  some  of  the 
and 
So sad and so dreary? 
"Patrizia Edlyne,4041376191952669,20-12-1976
"
     To  the  complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam  fell 
which now was Minas Morgul in its accursed vale. Five miles beyond Osgiliath 
the  desolation  that  lay  all about  it.  The waters  had  now  nearly all 
"Dodie Tomalin,4089118473478,20-07-1986
"
"Laverna De Marchi,4017951482869481,12-02-1996
"
"length they arose, and took their leave of the Lady, and thanked her for her  "
"####-made each was filled with fire, though how it was  kindled or fed, by art or  "
"was not a tale that  any  hobbit  liked to listen  to, even by a comfortable "
"they walked, brushing their  way through bush  and herb,  sweet  odours rose "
"Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny,  "
Legolas.  'A  bound  prisoner  escapes  both from  the  Orcs  and  from  the 
"Lissy Alway,4017953154663,12-09-1996
"
stare of those keen eyes.  
everywhere. And such bees! Bilbo had never seen anything like them. 
"and  freedom comes  again. But it is now near to noon, and  at that hour  we "
     Then  a  clamour arose  in the Deep  behind. Orcs had crept  like  rats 
shall come to them. I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling.' 
"     'Now, Mr.  Peregrin,' he  said,  'where  might you  be coming from, and "
"beech-tree, fair and strange in that treeless plain. "
"sat up he saw  nothing but  the back of  Strider  sitting hunched up, smoking "
"in it to sit down on or to eat: it was a hobbit-hole, and that means comfort. "
Cut the cloth and tread on the fat! 
"     'Hoom, hm, I have not troubled  about the  Great Wars,' said Treebeard; "
     He  removed the  bandage  first from Gimli's eyes.  'Your pardon! '  he 
     'Some  people!'  exclaimed Frodo.  'You  mean  Otho  and  Lobelia.  How 
"little  hobbit  dodged  this  way  and  that,  was  knocked  over  by  a  goblin  who  could "
looked  at  Gandalf and  smiled and  as  he did so many lines  of care  were 
"     'He would  have  gone,' said  Gandalf.  'Be not unjust  in your  grief!  "
"Avrom Lyston,4297248579311357,08-08-2001
"
"     The passage  twisted  round a few  turns, and then began to descend. It "
the Tower. And what was said therein was already  known. For in the day that 
and  wherever  he  tried  to  hide  he  was  found  out  by  the  terrific  explosions  of  his 
low 
high waterfalls  and  ran  away  hurriedly  to  unknown  lands.  In  the  still  evening  air 
In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone back up the Forest River with their 
"Sinclair Bowe,4041370919250373,25-03-1994
"
others knew nothing. Yet  the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape 
"     fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf, "
"     'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises! "
""
"only Damrod and Mablung flitting in and out of the shadows ahead, but others "
"     The tall  green man laughed grimly.  `I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,' "
""
The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my  judgement on all 
     The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the  
"drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me. "
     Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball  between  them. He bent 
"from Weathertop, and their stock of  provisions was beginning to run low. It  "
eastern spur of  the Mountain and was now hastening  to Dale. Dain had come. He 
road that  I followed on my way  hither. Or we might  pass by  and cross the 
you answered? ' 
"     `Isildur's Bane is found, you say,' said Boromir. `I have seen a bright "
perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so  light of what even 
"gleamed  dimly in  the night. `Orcs! ' he said. `Not very  near, and yet too "
longed 
matter much. 
"us,' answered Gandalf. `But I must have something to work on.  I cannot burn "
"huger than  the great hunting beasts, and more terrible than they because of "
"Buck Ellor,4017952873495,06-07-1987
"
     The next  day the  country on either side began to change  rapidly. The 
"Donn Ogles,4041592699037,07-05-1981
"
"Lothlurien maintained and defended against its  Enemy. I say  to you, Frodo, "
"of you,' said  a strange voice.  'Turn round and let  me have a look at your "
"     The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an  hour  "
"     'It is  past  noon,'  said Gandalf, 'and we at any  rate have not eaten "
"there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside them.' "
them. Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before 
"Up  he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like  a lost  child that "
"Nonah Jaycock,4041592605505,05-11-1975
"
"bold,  in their turn now gathered  themselves for a  last stand of desperate "
"wall. No tree grew there,  only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky  and "
     'How comes this?' said Thjoden sternly. He turned towards Jomer and the  
them away in sudden onset.' 
"Rivendell,  and joins  the Loudwater away in the  South.  Some  call  it the "
""
"in heavy earthward  mists,  and then as its power waxed,  and hope  grew  in "
"midst of which  the River  flowed. And Minas Ithil they built, Tower  of the  "
"     All was silent, save for the rumour of war in the City down  below, and "
voice fell dead on  the  dank fir-needles at his feet. The horses  would not 
"riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but still more at the lack  "
"     Just then they became  aware of a yellow light that  had appeared, some "
of  the Burg to  where the Riders were assembling  on  the green.  Many were 
"     'They will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'And anything else that this Rider of "
"celandine and anemones, white and blue, now folded for sleep; and there were "
"apart from themselves, indeed to  feel themselves as the strangers where all "
"was speechless.  'I  thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,' said Frodo bowing. "
"the  left.  At  once it begins to climb up,  up, winding  and climbing  back "
"Jason Demoge,4041594123104460,23-04-1987
"
that they have  cast trenches  and  stakes across the road.  We cannot sweep 
"of  dry cracked mud. The land ahead rose in long shallow  slopes, barren and "
"Alexandrina Churms,4017950061597851,20-01-1988
"
"who would see. After  that Wormtongue played dangerously, always  seeking "
"if he had had to run on his own legs,' said Pippin. "
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 
"Edna Binton,4041591163856777,14-02-2001
"
"this western  camp,  shadowed  all day by  cliff  and wall until  the  sun began  to  sink "
hope. Almost he had reached  the  summit of the  wall. Only  a little higher  
"Good  old  Bilbo-Bilbo-Bilbo-bo-bo-bo–""  And  then  he  fell  asleep,  and  there  was "
####- 
"away beside the open path, out  to rejoin the Entwash in its journey through "
There was no sign of the Riders. But  even as they were hurrying across they 
"servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.' "
 
"     'I  don't know. Nothing, maybe.  But he's up to no good, nosing around, "
"camp felt the  same.  But at  that very moment a trumpet sounded, and  a man "
and whispered softly to him. 
in the heart more than in the limb.' 
"Drogo, will  know more  of  these  fell things than  Gildor  Inglorion.  May "
pinched himself; still he could not think of anything. 
Was sung unheard by men or elves. 
"we have used  more than we ought,  if  we  have two weeks  still to go,  and "
"wasted  their  last  arrows,  and  now  the  bows  that  Beorn  had  given  them  were "
"forward, peering at them from under  his hood. 'And what may you be doing in "
"till Bilbo's head fell forward on his chest, and he snored comfortably in a corner.  "
     Away  in the  south Frodo could  see the  dim shapes of lofty mountains 
were shut up for hours.' 
"     'The  Red  Arrow!' said  Thjoden, holding  it, as  one  who receives  a  "
death lurking in doorway or  shadow;  and behind all  his mind  the  waiting  
little room. It was littered with papers and pens and pencils; but Bilbo was 
away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading as they came back  
"Beorn did not show it more than he could help, but really he had begun to get very "
those funny toys bobbing on a wire. 
them.  Little  they  ate  and  little  they  spoke.  They  could  not  count  the  passing  of 
     'Why not  now?' said Sam.  'It's not much more than  six o'clock. And I 
""
"Isabelita Trousdale,4203886422928,01-08-1997
"
""
"should wish that the words of Thorin, of which he repented, should not prove true: "
"clear voice in stirring song,  and Merry felt his heart leap, though he  did "
"least, that is how I see it.' "
"include  this marvellous gem, and  that  trouble would yet come of  it. Now he went "
"understand well what  was going on, nuzzled up to  him,  putting his nose to "
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside. 
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out 
already for a long day's march.' 
"Allis Tatham,4660472914271,20-02-1999
"
among themselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and 
"world, and about it  lightnings flickered; and then a tremor ran through the "
seen  him about lately. What his  right name is I've  never  heard: but he's 
"suddenly  slipped  on  his  ring,  and  to  the  great  astonishment  of  the  dwarves  he "
"could  see  (or  shoot)  but  no  entrance.  They  climbed  in  or  out  with  ladders,  and "
well-arrayed  companies  that they had quite  forgotten that the bright mail 
"-- unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already defeated? ' "
     Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling 
"than your words said. You  were  not friendly with Boromir, or  you  did not  "
"to  us. I first saw him when I was a child,  and he has been twice or thrice "
"Riddle-game  and Bilbo's escape, he would not say any more,  except in  dark "
"Jayme Iglesiaz,4987091137738900,13-03-1981
"
"the only thing he cared for?  But if he  hated it,  why didn't he get rid of "
"Katlin Aaronson,4041371301730,14-01-1988
"
     Chapter 10  The Breaking of the Fellowship  
"are his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must tell in full, for only "
soon  or  die.  I  think  I  would  rather  be  smashed  by  Smaug  in  the  open  than 
     Jomer  and Aragorn  leant wearily on their swo rds. Away on the left the 
"     'No, Lady,' he  answered. `To tell you the truth, I  wondered what  you  "
described the figure in his dream. The elvish folk were passing bowls from hand to 
"in  which he  walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire,  but it seemed "
"Lee Lindro,4970295557789,06-01-2000
"
"black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at last, up an "
     'Run  away now!' said  Gandalf.  'You  will  get plenty  when  the time 
"uplands of Lamedon they overtook our horses, and  swept round us, and  would "
3. Of the Ordering of the Shire 
behind! We will press on by day and dark!' 
"Garner Boyland,4748204636583,04-12-1987
"
"Postmaster and First Shirriff were attached  to  the  mayoralty, so that  he "
"were  managed  by  mere  luck,  just  for  your  sole  benefit?  You  are  a  very  fine "
"     But for a while  they could still feel, and  indeed the senses of their "
     Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the  Pelennor.  
and  we  rejoice  that  you  are  alive  beyond  our  hope.  We  came  expecting  to  find 
the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of which only the point was left. 
 
"his eyes, and carried him off. "
     After a  while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in  the narrow but 
"     'Farewell  for  this  time,'  said  Bergil.  'Take  my  greetings to my "
"faded hemlocks  and wood-parsley,  fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes,  and "
     Till Durin wakes again from sleep. 
"out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it, a short jagged  "
time seemed to slow its pace. so that between the raising of a foot  and the 
     'And what  if Sauron does  not conquer? What will you do to him?' asked 
"Marne Totton,4041373472547,19-02-2000
"
told me  the  true story  soon after I  came to live here.  He said  you had 
Lady of Lurien. 
""
"burglar,  the  chosen  and  selected  burglar.  So  now  let's  get  on  and  make  some "
"     'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider. "
with the journey we have begun!' 
"     'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,' said Legolas; 'for it "
"hand, like a dark  cloud rising in the East and  looming  up  to engulf him. "
"was  said, for the speech that the  Silvan folk east of the  mountains  used "
"stood up, looking pale but grim  and defiant, and very  much alive. The gash "
Quest from disaster?' 
his memory of others that he had seen. 
There you'll  find an  old inn that  is  called The  Prancing Pony. Barliman 
"Jessalin Isakovic,4041378440747,02-04-1988
"
"left in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.' Then "
airs. Before long the hobbits could make out the shape of the land for  some 
the wizard's  face he saw  at first only lines of care and sorrow; though as 
"North,  and they drew near now to  the walls of the Pelennor. And  the  King "
and stars were fanned to leaping light. 
"two tied hands at his throat, and unclasped the brooch of his cloak. Just as "
fashion with a high prow. and there was none to row or steer it. 
"     Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat  with his head bowed,  either in "
"     'To my home, or one of my homes,' answered Treebeard. "
"     'You take  after Bilbo,' said  Gandalf.  `There is  more about you than "
"     The Sundering Seas between them lay, "
"""Durin,  Durin!""  said  Thorin.  ""He  was  the  father  of  the  fathers  of  the  eldest "
back.  `Ow!' he cried. `You are  too  hard  now  to slap! But there you are: 
 
that was  his  affair.  They would wait  in  the  tunnel  for  his  report. So  they  sat near 
Rohan  in that  hour was like a  storm  upon the plain and  a thunder in the 
"tell - though not, of course, in the  way  I have  reported it. Gollum  is a  "
catching up the bundle he came loping towards the near door of the stairs.  
"Oriana Westwell,4652232092443458,04-07-1994
"
"Margeaux Tourne,4127491293509,29-08-1992
"
or two from where the hobbits  lay it turned east and ran along a  shelf cut 
"####-""Thorin! Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fill! Kili!""  he  cried  as  loud  he  could-it seemed a "
"####-stern  and kingly face  it  saw, and for  a while it gave  little thought to "
blowing and swaying in the  cold airs. For cold they seemed to Sam after the  
on the faces  of the men looking on: the  sight of  their Captain sitting on 
presents to all and sundry - the latter were  those  who went out again by a  
and thy folk: to rest never until your oath is  fulfilled. For this war will 
"Mordor; so that what he made was naught, only a little copy, a child's model  "
"Andi Antony,4017951167763512,05-11-1983
"
"     The water was cool but not icy, and it had an unpleasant taste, a t once "
under the deep clouded night. There was neither  star nor moon. Not until the  
     'Smjagol! ' said Frodo desperately. 'Precious  will be angry.  I  shall 
came  the  men  of  the  Lake  with  long  swords.  Panic  came  upon  the Goblins;  and 
nothing of the cleaving of the horn? ' 
"####-all the Captains he held up first the short sword that Sam had carried,  and "
hideous shivering cry and lay still. 
his household. 
"of  old  to  be  found  in  the  deserted  caverns  of  the mines  of Moria,  since  the  dwarf "
"turn  he  would  see  gleams  in  the  darkness  round  them,  and  sometimes  pairs  of "
orders  because they  are  frightened.  No hobbit has ever killed another on  
"Idaline Proudlove,4017956848038663,02-06-1999
"
"     So they came  slowly  to the  white  bridge.  Here  the  road, gleaming "
looked over  the gate at them in surprise. 
"Jameson World,4788825738368,03-09-1992
"
"less than five days before,  while the sun still rose and there was hope  in "
"     'Now, now,' growled  Shagrat. 'I  have my  orders. And it's more than my "
"as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh  on a  century, not indeed  since "
them and towering tall above Gandalf. 
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!' 
Houses of  Healing; and there they were tended well. For though all lore was 
some other will was using his small voice. 
`but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in 
"again, wiping his hands on his apron. "
"It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their feast:  such indeed "
"and wrung  the  true  story  out of  him, bit by  bit,  together  with  much "
"Charlena Barnes,4017954942474934,06-09-1983
"
"by Gandalf, who seemed to know his way about pretty well. "
the camp prepared for  them. Only the king  and his guard were going up into 
"turned  away, and a great bulk,  beyond  the light's reach,  heaved its huge "
"upon a floor of   polished stone,  written  with  strange signs,  a man might  "
the wind.' 
"actually rose from his seat and bowed. `Gluin at your service,' he said, and "
the 
"in smouldering slumber, as threatening and  dangerous as a  sleeping  beast.  "
roads nearby nothing was moving now; but Sam feared the watchful eyes on 
'Enemies  of the  Orcs  are  likely to  be our friends. Do any folk dwell in 
"     But about the Gate resistance still was stout, and there the knights of "
"talk, but kept glancing back, and from side to side. "
"been deserted  when they entered it,  it  had  before been  well tilled, and "
"his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I  do  not  know, to look at the "
     And runes of power upon the door. 
"quicker and hardier, or because of some plan of Grishnbkh's, the Isengarders "
"The  dwarves  listened  and  shook  their  beards,  for  they  knew  that  they  must "
"strong and noble-hearted. They did not love goblins, or fear them. When they took "
"     `I would not have it so,' said Faramir. "
     When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless.  
"round the  broken  stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it  was hollow,  and "
"heights  and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls  of stone, and the "
"Elfstone, and Beregond of the Guard too.' "
"sat outside and sang  songs all day, or cheered if any dwarf showed so much as his "
"the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating "
lands about looked grey and dr ear. 
"Web Engelbrecht,4041371831346489,03-11-1987
"
through a white shell. 
him in all the hollows of the hills.  
"than  in  deed.  The  time  was,  all  the  same,  when  you  seemed  to  think  that  I  had "
"alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left  the  world, and they have "
     'Which question  shall  I  answer first?' said Pippin. 'My father farms 
"""So I can well believe,"" said Smaug, ""but that is hardly our usual name."" "
"whole wood  - the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.' "
"and face worse defeat to come. If we go  back now, then the Ring must remain "
"the pursuers found things that had been dropped or cast away: food-bags, the "
sought  there long for Thrbin son of  Thrur  after  he  was  lost.  I passed 
"     'We caught  a glimpse  of  the old villain, or so Gandalf  hints,' said "
doled out by order.' 
you?' 
"     While Thjoden was speaking, Gandalf  rode a short way ahead, and he sat "
climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair.' 
     that is mighty fond of jokes; 
"     'To Waymeet, that'll be, ' said  Cotton,  'to fetch  more  of  the gang. "
"     'Farewell!' said Frodo, bowing low. `Think what you will, I am a friend "
little  breath of sweet air moved  the  curtain. He breathed deep  and  fell 
"fourteen!  Well,  well!  it  might  be  worse,  and  then  again  it  might  be  a  good  deal "
"     'Everything?' said Gandalf. 'The ring  as well? You agreed to that, you  "
"to that city with the son of Denethor,  to aid his folk in their war against "
"D®nedain  of the North, and Elf and Dwarf, and greathearts of the Shire, and "
the great gates. Pippin  and I were with him. We were sitting on Treebeard's 
"Danyelle Placidi,4041592076450765,16-06-1980
"
the  path and could not see him. As fast as he could he trudged up the road. 
"fixed  on Frodo, as if  he was trying  to  read the Halfling's thoughts.  At "
"the  way  of the  Men of Minas Tirith to  desert their friends at  need,' he "
"of indomitable stone, yet it was the key, the weakest point in all that high "
"prowess, whom you should not take into the shadows, but  should lead to war, "
"answered.  'Just a  fool's hope,  as  I have  been told. And when I heard of "
"     'Is it  indeed?' laughed Gildor. 'Elves  seldom give  unguarded advice, "
"     The Man in the Moon took another mug, "
"more ordered mass of men came into view, marching not running, still holding "
"separated again. But they had not been lying long, and Bilbo was only just getting "
"Tania Aslott,4041591156294,29-03-1994
"
then call me.' 
evil dream to find the familiar  night still over the world. But Gollum  lay 
"a hill  some way off with  trees on  it, pretty  thick  in parts. Out of  the dark mass of "
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
"and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.' "
"Isengarders. Some  were  pointing back  away south, and  some were  pointing "
"moment, tense and menacing; and then he collapsed, falling forward on to all "
"door in the Mountain's side, the door  of the  Samma th  Naur. Far  away  now "
"drops them. But you must  go dangling  after him,  dawdling and talking, and "
flashed  in  the  dark  by  itself.  It  burned  with  a  rage  that  made  it  gleam  if  goblins 
city in your long war? ' 
"Houses of Healing, where  only the  gravely hurt or sick  are tended. For it "
"his terror, while Beregond of the Guard thought first of the captain whom he "
intertwined  beneath their feet. They  saw now that  the pillars were richly 
"them  black, shutting out  the  sun,  the hills of  Emyn Muil, in  which  no "
"Bernice MacConnell,4017955544085,17-12-1981
"
 
woods beyond the Tongue. 
danger.  
     'That is  the  signal for  supper!'  said  Bilbo.  The  pain  and alarm 
"Mollie Dearle,4017958287822656,13-11-1990
"
"a  fearful  mess  in  the  room,  and  piles  of  unwashed  crocks  in  the  kitchen.  Nearly "
heart. Consider  Saruman. If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow 
mere  'question' and not  a  'riddle' according to  the strict rules  of the 
"had set for it:  fortune had betrayed him for  the moment, and the world had "
"and rushed wildly up the path, calling and calling his master's name. He was "
and the Place of the  Fountain before the feet of the  White Tower: tall and 
"enemies, and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my  "
"with oil, even the garments of Faramir and the coverlets; but as yet no fire "
strangely moved with a feeling that  he had  not known before. Here was  one 
"Hobbiton side, now lifeless and with broken  windows, they were disturbed to "
death: almost it froze my heart.' 
"Conny Andrivel,4017955767363870,06-03-1986
"
began to think their king might have made a serious mistake. As for the Master he 
"down  on the  stools beside him. `Bring wine for the guests,'  he said. `And "
"dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled. "
"mind, about  five minutes between each pair of you. Bombur  is  fattest  and will do "
"knows so  much as you say, Mithrandir,  will  he not rather smile than fear, "
 
####-     And suddenly he felt the  Eye. There was an eye  in the Dark Tower that 
"""Which  king?""  said  another  with  a  grim  voice.  ""As  like  as  not  it  is  the "
"go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards.' "
"Lurlene Wareham,4041378169056,12-03-2001
"
Pippin alone and sleepless stood upon the wall and gazed eastward. 
"them also  from behind and above; but there was no time for make any other plan, "
"     He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was  in the water close to the  edge, "
"and it's very difficult to find anyone."" "
""
"log. What's  more, it  wasn't a  log, for it had  paddle-feet, like a swan's "
snowstorm.' 
so I have!' cried Bilbo. 'And my will and  all  the other documents too. You  
"custom, but for this time we will lake you on our road, and  you shall lodge "
"felled the black serpent. A grim morn, and a glad day, and a golden sunset!' "
"Willetta Bedo,4248192626696,05-04-1992
"
"though  old  agreements  cannot  stand,  since  so  many  have  a  claim  in  its  winning "
"almost every direction, except from the west over the river, from the Mountains. In "
"     'They were  many,' said  Aragorn,  'and they  do not heed the wrath  of "
"throw your live away rashly or in bitterness,' he said. 'You  will be needed "
"together.  But  we  shall  not  go alone,  as  I  thought. The  king is  now "
"Ariadne Stoakes,4017956239222,08-10-1984
"
"the West drew near to the end of the living lands, the two wanderers came to  "
"a great  burning, so  that  the hills and the mountains were  dyed  as  with "
"ordinary  hunger, the desire to eat hobbits, had seemed the chief  danger in "
"     'You  cannot enter here,' said Gandalf, and the huge shadow halted. 'Go "
"Vlad McIlvoray,4017955097589,18-12-1986
"
"another  for a. game, and catching  them, and  tossing  them down  into  the darkness "
"they were all  inside, bowing and  saying  ""at your  service"" one after another. Dori, "
"Shelley Grivori,4041375703808,26-01-1976
"
the windows went out. A voice shouted in the dark: 
"Nicola Quixley,4863319098091350,09-03-1997
"
"warriors  in  armour,  and  there  had  been  wars  and  deeds  which  were  now  only  a "
drift was laid to cut off our escape.' 
Gollum shuddering. 'And He hated Isildur's city.' 
     `Safely on my way.' 
Bilbo  had run out  of Bag End without  a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps 
"Nicolle MacKnockiter,4017957857899,12-10-1990
"
"fears as best he could. And as  he  watched, it seemed to him that  Denethor  "
"travellers, all armed, and two of them uncommonly  large and strong-looking. "
     Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;  
"Carl Edland,4041591529208101,15-02-1981
"
"     Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the high "
bird that I have seen before. But look! I  can  see something nearer at hand 
"Norma McCart,4017956248520120,22-07-1999
"
pinnacles of weathered rock; at  least they were sheltered from the easterly 
"down. Then he put his hands out  stealthily, and slowly  lifted the lump up: "
"     Strider looked  grave. 'I do not know,' he said. 'I came  west with him "
voice. 
since he  left. I thought you would go  after him sooner or  later; indeed I 
"     'We aren't careful about  that,' said Merry. 'As a matter of fact I'm a  "
"Loretta Pimme,4414678925982,01-02-1983
"
with arrows.' 
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the 
"gazing at the  dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows, a menace still in "
"this, you can  see: all of them except perhaps one or two rascals, and a few "
"beautiful names on my travels,  but  I  suppose they're  a bit too grand for "
"     'Why, you  have  nearly finished  it, Mr. Frodo!' Sam exclaimed. 'Well, "
it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin took it in his fingers and knotted  
     Beneath the Moon and under star 
"cry, the voice of a Nazgyl; but this cry no longer held any terror for them: "
"     He did not obey at  once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking "
will. We  shall see!' Sam choked with tears. 'Don't  despair!' said Strider. 
     Drums rolled and fires leaped up.  The  great doors  of the  Black Gate 
Treebeard coming towards them. with another Ent at his side. 
"master.  he  said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. "
     'Then what  have  you  seen with them?' snarled the  other.  'Garn! You  
"     Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to  the  hythe. A yellow "
"Fleurette Balch,4041376544045,03-09-1986
"
"     The  Authorities, it is true, differ whether  this last  question was a  "
remainder  of  the  company  and  got  them  out.  Poor  fat  Bombur  was  asleep  or 
"a  good  bit  of  work  from  a  bad,  though  they  usually  have  a  good  notion  of  the "
"you'll pay for it. We're going on; but we'll settle with you first. Come on, "
north wind from the mountains.  
"to tell you  all about myself at once. I had  to study you  first,  and make "
some of  his precious machinery to work. By  that time there were  many Ents 
"     'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It seemed to  me  to fit somehow, though I "
"Jaye Wetherick,4041593361769,29-05-1984
"
"to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Flanor at "
hissing and  gasping just in  front of them.  But  after a time their senses 
"Aline Wycherley,4017951573120,06-12-1998
"
"despair, murdering their kin to ease their  own death.' Then passing through "
"what  I  have  heard  about  him,  and  I  have  only  heard  very  little  of  all  there  is  to "
"dead, if it had not been for the hobbit; and they thanked him many times. Some of "
"came floating back down the wind, which had shifted round towards the south. "
"as  if it  were  a  shadow that  being cast  by  no  light,  no  light could "
that armies would break upon like water.' 
"might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken  your companions, "
"longer stay in  Middle-earth; and among them, filled with a sadness that was "
####-wizard had not escaped without a wound; and  there were  few unharmed in all the 
"suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the "
may  be  drawing near.  There is naught that an old Ent can  do to hold back  
else his sight was returning. He could see the grey line as it came dangling 
"     She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards the East "
     'And  they tell  us to throw it away!' he cried. `I do not sa y  destroy 
will  be very hard. And neither strength nor  wisdom will  carry us far upon 
"     'Never  yet.  Do not then  stumble at the end  of the  road,'  answered "
they would not say) to harry  the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between 
"Your heart is shr ewd as  well  as  faithful, and saw clearer than your eyes.  "
the evil  purpose  in her remorseless eyes.  Those  same  eyes  that  he had 
"jutting  cape  of  hard  rock.  On  the  shallow  shore  most  of  the barrels  ran  aground, "
herdsmen had  pastured  great droves of  cattle there;  but a mile below the 
come. Their cries and the tramp of their feet passed into  the City and died 
in mail and shone like silver in the sun. 
""
"great wind took it, and  it was  all blown away, and passed; and then a hush "
"Jessika Hawkshaw,4041595415655887,16-04-1982
"
taken. He is fey and dangerous.' Quickly he told of Denethor's strange words 
"gleam of Anduin, the Great  River.  He lifted his  eyes across the river and "
"Johny Abarough,4041594075842034,13-03-1988
"
the ring. 
"things  very  well,  unless  he  put  them  down  on  his  Engagement  Tablet:  like  this: "
"Tabitha Pelling,4041378882911871,28-10-1989
"
the inscription on the arch. 'I thought I knew the elf-letters but  I cannot 
"later. My  dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a  Brandybuck for inquisitiveness;  "
whichever course they  took in  the end. Aragorn  let  them  drift with  the 
"wormed their way  forward bit  by  bit, until  they came to the edge  of the "
"that  things were  not  all well. He  stood  outside  in  the  shadows  some way  off,  and "
"horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,' he said. "
"gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at  the sides, which rose "
of our  friends escaped. It is our task to find him and help  him  before we 
     That was enough for the others.  They gave in. Their weapons were taken  
"Past', is  one of the oldest parts of the tale.  It  was written long before "
"we can. We keep off strangers and the  foolhardy; and we train and we teach, "
"     The Riders of Rohan sat  uneasily upon their horses,  on either side of "
it is time your master went to bed.' 
such 
"     When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town ; "
"over the  edge that  yawned  upon their left.  A man  stood  there, near the  "
"     'It hurts us, it hurts us,' hissed Gollum. `It freezes, it bites! Elves "
"dim figures  in the gloom. After they had eaten,  Gandalf gave  them each  a  "
would have dropped all their quarrel until we were dead.' 
"the tumbled lands between, the mountains of the Ephel D®ath frowned at "
as  blacksmith-work  or  even  coalmining.  But  we  have  never  forgotten  our  stolen 
"and  purple  clover,  and wide  stretches  of  short white  sweet  honey-smelling clover. "
"and a  hail of darts and arrows whistled over  the  wall, as  Aragorn leaped "
     'Do you think he------' began Frodo. 
the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They   lost the thread of  his tale 
Poor  Bilbo  sat  in  the  dark  thinking  of  all  the  horrible  names  of  all  the  giants 
"Kirby Purchase,4017955203245,26-04-1975
"
shingly  shore  under  hanging  banks  and  was  walled  at  the  eastern  end  by  a  little 
"near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden  from "
"Alicea Saggs,4194027155557144,10-02-1978
"
""
"Yorke Sunman,4041592194401,08-07-2001
"
"Margalo Betancourt,4684351780799815,25-03-1992
"
"Terra Fenny,4041592344162,18-10-1982
"
"Laurice End,4041595741208,24-01-1983
"
"Batsheva Gitting,4017951855873,13-04-2000
"
"in the upper cone, but still far from the reeking summit, to a dark entrance "
or listening. 
"hill and the next, still whistling and crying: "
"Cliff Pipet,4041596665059,09-06-1996
"
"shaped  like  stars.  Among them,  nodding  on  slender  stalks,  were  other  "
came beside him. 
     After  a few remarks about  the weather and the agricultural  prospects 
"Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and  he  begged  for help. But Thjoden would "
""
"eaves of the wood, then we will make a last search upon the battle-field and  "
"about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.' "
"     'But what then, Sam Gamgee, what then? When you get there, what are you  "
"Arabelle Miner,4017956968169520,30-07-1993
"
     'No one did. We stay  here in the big  Shirriff-house. We're the  First 
"     `It wasn't funny that way, Mr. Frodo.  It was  queer.  All wrong, if it "
"known that the Ring  is abroad, and that it is  borne by a  hobbit. He knows "
"     `As for me,' said Boromir, `my way home lies onward and not back.' "
"Sigrid Gussin,4041371298772276,06-12-1982
"
"far, following  Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to  learn anything  from him "
"still see and read."" "
"Some  of  these  caves,  too,  go  back  in  their  beginnings  to  ages  before  the  goblins, "
themselves 
defeat. 
Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that 
"     But at length all was said, and they parted again for a  while, until it "
"now  hurried desiring only to find a fire,  and a door  between them and the "
mind;  a  song  that  seemed  to  come  like  a  pale  light behind  a  grey 
"""We  knew  it  would  be  a  desperate  venture,""  said  Thorin,  ""and we  know  that "
"Suzanna Dalliwatr,4581327378209,19-04-1988
"
"the men of Lossarnach  had passed they muttered: 'So few! Two hundreds, "
"told openly  for  the  first time; but  that mattered little,  since  I  had "
"must do so,  and that it is my fate to receive help from you. where  I least  "
"     'No thank 'ee,' said  Ted, 'I won't.  I heard tell of them when I was a  "
     Beneath the mountain -lee 
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder.  `I thought  they had all vanished long ago. I 
again into the Water with a hiss like a  hundred hot snakes.  And there  was 
"Baggins,  Boffin,   Took,   Brandybuck,   Grubb,  Chubb,  Burrows,   Bolger, "
"Eldredge Arthur,4017955437477019,15-02-1992
"
now there were eight mounds on the east -side of the Barrowfield. 
and I smell it in the air. I do not think we shall meet again.' 
loomed against the westward stars a dark  black  shape. A great barrow stood 
"by  a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo  shivered, listening with "
snored  beside  his  friend.  Then  in  crept  the  hobbit.  Very  soon  the chief guard had 
Morgul Vale and looked on the evil city. 
"mostly above the Road, nestling  on the hillside with  windows looking west. "
"     'What  then shall  I say?'  said Gandalf, and  paused  for a  while  in "
"Obediah Mulbry,4017950315606,16-03-1991
"
"""Yes,  dead,""  said Róac. ""The  thrush, may his feathers never fall, saw him die, "
surprisingly small roll. This  he  put into his pack  that lay on the floor. 
shadow-mantled fortress. Often blocked  or destroyed by  the tumults  of the 
"happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.' "
"Before  you  could  get  round  it  in  the  South,  you  would  get  into  the  land  of  the "
"near to  the further gate, Frodo saw a  dark  ill-kept  house behind a thick  "
and scrambled in a barren country  of red stones. Nowhere could they see any 
"     'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,' said Legolas. "
way is narrow.' 
"     'And all  seemed well  with  Bilbo. And  the  years  passed. Yes,  they "
"and got home alive, and  that  is more  than most can say who have had words with "
"     'Good!' said Merry.  'Then I  would  like supper first, and after that a  "
eyes; but when he looked again he could not see it any more. 
"Pattie Bluck,4041593279771,21-10-1999
"
"army. They still  flew  high and out  of sight of all  save Legolas, and  yet "
"Creighton Golden of Ireland,4041597493071,25-08-1999
"
"watching the passage that led to it. They were aroused, alert, ready for anything. "
"they  were all soaked,  and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get "
"top-hat,  either;  so  they  gave  up  fires  and  sat  at  night  and  dozed  in  the  enormous "
"parley. We will bear no weapons against you, but we leave you to your gold. You "
"there looking out for guests, very pleased to  take them straight  to Him, O "
"Jowyn, shrieking, striking with beak and claw.  "
"Lianne Clarycott,4461690284419449,09-12-1986
"
"Jomer, King of the Mark!' "
"of some others of the name, begging your pardon. And I hope my Sam's "
Ones can.' 
"out. Then the spider jumped back, and he had time to cut his legs loose. After that "
"pleased at falling flat on Bilbo's mat with Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur on top of him. "
"Judith Lovering,4017958816119996,14-02-2000
"
"of Sauron, shadow of despair.' "
were in a valley filled almost entirely with a mighty growth of oaks. 
"come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them. "
sleep. 
"     The Bree-hobbits were,  in fact, friendly  and  inquisitive,  and Frodo "
"Arabelle Gleeton,4041378176710799,11-08-1976
"
####-     'The  living  have  never  used that  road  since  the  coming  of  the 
their knees to hide their feet. 
lords sat in aged halls musing on heraldry; in  secret chambers withered men  
branches springing together from  the trunk made a good  hiding-place and  a 
the  sun  began  to  sink westwards-behind  the mountains. Their shadows fell across 
"rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver, "
"Jay Hounson,4041374111599,27-02-1992
"
"Biddie Dingwall,4041378964297413,10-05-1984
"
companion would tell me how it was.' 
"     Jomer's eyes  blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed "
"sun-star, you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlurien?' "
him.  There might be just a  chance. His love for Frodo rose above all other  
"     'For that is not my errand!' he cried, turning back and speaking to the "
Gollum on the edge of the abyss was fighting like a mad thing with an unseen 
     And now we wish -- 
     One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them 
aside to  Frodo.  'It seems a terrible  long time that  I've been  away. But 
"Right  through the press  drove  Thjoden Thengel's son,  and  his  spear was "
And trees and hills they long have known. 
Dark Tower. For the Enemy has failed-so far. Thanks to Saruman:' 
"####-""I  daresay,""  grumbled Bombur;  ""but  they won't  find  it  difficult  to  send  stones "
"looked  at  the  fire,  and  the  spilled  jugs,  and  the  gnawed mutton,  in  surprise,  pop! "
""
"other  imprisoned  dwarves,  telling  them  that  Thorin  their  chief was  also  in prison "
"(such things being  quite unknown), only  a feather in their caps;  and they "
"Ally Romanski,4122040183137489,11-11-1988
"
dearly than we  hoped.  The plan has been well laid. It is now  seen that in 
"     `Yet  now,  if the  Rohirrim are  grown in  some  ways more like to us, "
     'Open!' he cried. 'The Lord of the Mark comes forth!' 
"     'We don't  often see Shire-folk riding on the Road  at  night,' he went "
"Myrtie Kitcherside,4773216734036,10-04-1984
"
Legolas passed in. And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone. 
"clear air watchmen on the walls saw afar a new sight of fear, and their last "
"crebain  came,' said Aragorn. `It must be put out and not lit again.' "
"Linc Kofax,4017950296697070,19-11-1975
"
"Olympie Babcock,4041377697255,06-08-1978
"
"heard Frodo's command, they murmured angrily: "
"Lugb®rz at once, and to  Lugb®rz only . And  the prisoner is to be  kept safe  "
mused. 'How long have I been  asleep?' For the  scent had borne  him back to 
"became for a while nearly  level. The dark trees drew aside, and  ahead they "
calls from the woods near the shore below.  
looking down  on  them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes 
Gandalf? Is he not here? Could he not  have saved the  king and Jowyn?'  But 
     It seemed light in that  dark land to his eyes  that had passed through 
made  a pillow of his cloak for his master's  head. Frodo  was too  weary to 
"     Frodo  did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade  was dull. Yet "
"     'I don't think you will find it that way,' he whispered. 'It isn't easy "
Chapter 7. Helm's Deep 
"them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this  tunnel  they  knew well.; for in "
"short sword, hidden as usual, but he said nothing about that. ""We have no need of "
passed.' 
'Thjoden King! Thjoden King! The King of the Mark returns!' 
"stone  had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became  less, or  "
""
things -  or Bilbo's things (they  reminded  him sharply of him in their new 
"Reba Mingardi,4041375642303,03-09-1997
"
"own  provisions were  very  scanty. Now  they  had  bread  and  cheese,  and  plenty  of "
"Straight through the forest is your way now. Don't stray off the track!-if you do, it "
"Geri Wagerfield,4119359856592,23-01-1977
"
minds; for the  heaps of carrion were too great  for burial or for  burning. 
"Elizabeth Sommerfeld,4017959420136889,12-05-1997
"
say too much.' 
"Finlay Andover,4799512423305,31-08-1984
"
"####-hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a  "
"guided now  by Haldir and his  brother  R®mil. `Farewell,  sweet Nimrodel! ' "
     Sn man i yulma nin enquantuva? 
"is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry  can stroll about in the dingle, "
"in  the fair house of Elrond, and  though autumn was now crawling  towards winter "
They  would have foundered  in the Dead Marshes but for  Gollum. Frodo 
"     Gandalf halted  before a  tall  door of  polished  metal. 'See,  Master  "
"wood.  Up  the  hill  they  went;  but  there  was  no  proper  path  to  be  seen,  such  as "
     It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the spell of 
"     `No,' said  Frodo,  feeling  strangely rustic and untutored. `But if we "
"South, and East could be heard in the inn,  and when  the Shire-hobbits used "
     'Good  for the  Tooks!' cried Pippin.  'But someone is going  to get in 
"falls could be heard  in the night as it rushed down through its rocky gate, "
"and  comfortable, and they had a great deal  to think and wonder  about.  At  "
     'What does he not  hate?  '  said Frodo. 'But what has the Tower of the 
     Before the  crossing  of the  mountains the Hobbits had  already become 
"     `But the Dwarves did not make the evil,' said Gimli. "
     Hardly had  Sam hidden the light  of  the star -glass  when she came.  A 
"Berry Rodden,4572520467105,09-07-1991
"
"behind and with one swift stroke had stung him in the neck. He lay now pale, "
"dawn,  winding  their way into the heart of the great mountains. Immediately "
"Romain Whild,4041377038850751,11-04-1998
"
"Noah Feild,4041592303556,29-03-1977
"
came. Once more water was flung by a hundred hands wherever a spark appeared. 
"     'Then  trust mine,'  said Gandalf. 'It is quite  made  up.  Go away and "
"Oakenshield as well as I do now. I assure you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of "
such loveliness. None  of Durin's race would mine those  caves for stones or  
""
"world's  youth, when the Trees  of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This "
"all else, and gazed as one turned to st one. "
Now Gollum was  in  a much worse  state  than when  Bilbo  had  asked  him  the 
"stretched himself out, dizzy and weary, and he spoke no more for a while. At "
<br>
"was again, and to be sure of his road ahead. "
"Joyan MacCracken,4041379413842,19-03-1989
"
"moment,  he was  so  flustered  by  the  egg-question. All  the  same  it was  a poser  for "
"clearer and more powerful than Sam had ever heard him use, and it rose above "
that you are come on the wings  of song out of the forgotten days he said. It 
""
never before had  he been  so  suddenly and so keenly aware of the  feel and 
"the ring in your voice tells it. This is  a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait "
"     'I dare say  you could,'  snorted Gimli. 'You are a  Wood-elf,  anyway, "
"""Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain!"" said the dwarf "
"listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring, "
"Tucker Beggs,4017952558005,01-07-1980
"
"Only  I feel very tired, and I've a pain here.' He put  his hand to the back  "
"fills me with foreboding. A  vision it was that  you saw, I  think,  and  no "
he returned you would not have known your son.' 
our folk.' 
"####-test, you do not know me yet.' "
wizard. 
a foot of Aragorn's breast. Aragorn did not stir. 
"with their foes; and a black dread  fell on them, knowing  that the tides of "
"daresay  you  still like mushrooms.'  He laughed.  'Ah yes, I recognized the "
"down, see?' "
spent cheerily.  
eastward. 
"Claudius Minci,4041377596744586,23-04-1987
"
"come and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in living or dying, from "
"invented  them  and  wrote  them  with  silver  pens,  as  your  friends  could  tell  you. "
"it, and what is done with it turns to evil.' "
"     Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of "
"axes,  swords  and  spears  hanging;  and  there  in  rows  stood  great  jars  and  vessels "
"and the position of Jomer, the king's nephew. Pippin marvelled at the amount "
Then Pippin received back his sword and put it in its sheath. 
"she  will, then let us cross  the  River and in happier days let us dwell in "
"ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.' "
back to Mordor with the speed of the wrath of Sauron; and behind it the wind 
"     'Good  morning,  merry  friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern window "
summons  long expected and  yet  dreadful  when it comes. His hand trembled. 
"     `But  talking would stop me thinking and wondering,  which are quite as "
than half like a goblin.' 
"strengths were joined, and  the powers  of each  were used in  league. Other  "
"Noe Chill,4041370303169122,20-07-1991
"
"who dwell nigh!  Every  man and strong lad able to bear  arms,  all who have "
interest to  a book that appeared likely to  treat mostly of  the remote and 
kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.' 
deserted by all the races of the  world. Rangers passed  at times beyond the 
as if time was in a hurry and  wished to make one year do for twenty. In the 
"""Dead!  Dead?""  shouted  the  dwarves.  ""Dead!  Then  we  have  been  in  needless "
"white, a  young lord  tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue "
     a-glimmer in a valley sheer 
wall. Follow me!' 
####-land. We must march out to meet him at  once.  We  must  make ourselves  the 
"Ellswerth De Maine,4834538793998140,20-07-1995
"
"far off was  clear,  as the cold  blast, rising to  a  gale, drove  back the "
"spaces where the walls of the Pelennor stood. The  watchmen cried aloud, and "
same. The explanation did not seem to explain. 
""
     Sam looked a bit awkward. 
adventure it. No other road will serve.' 
"     As  they prepared  for sleep  in  the  inn at  Bree,  darkness  lay  on "
 
"Behind them the light grew in the East. As they  walked they compared notes,  "
"     'I  cannot  say,'  answered Gandalf.  'It depends  on many chances. But "
"Taite Lis,4017956339774,20-02-1986
"
"Andrew Grutchfield,4017952368206046,06-08-1995
"
"wearing ironmongery, whether it wears well or no.' "
"evil,  or have nothing to do with us at  all, we must go  down at  once. Not "
the grass. Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red 
"issued from the dale; upon its brow they caught, still  far away, a glint in "
     The mountains sinking grey 
"hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and  she sang. Sad and  sweet was the "
"homesteads there  were with oast  and garner, fold and byre, and  many rills "
"jerked back, nearly  wrenching  Sting from Frodo's arm.  Black dr ops dripped "
"Matilde Gwillym,4041590946083,31-01-1984
"
"noticed  on  the way  down,  side-passages opened, this way and that. Gollum began "
"""This way!"" some yelled. ""That way!"" others yelled. "
"it,' said Thjoden; 'for this is little like  my  fair  house  in Edoras. And "
wavered. He lurched and stumbled. Desperately Sam tried to help him and hold 
"wool-pated truants!  A fine  hunt you  have  led  us! Two  hundred  leagues,  "
"     'I  do  so,'  said Aragorn, 'and I care  not  whether you say  now asla  "
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends  out from the trees and 
"     'Well, what of it?' "
"Konstantin Inglefield,4041599793946777,27-01-1987
"
ending  with a  last help!  that trailed off into a  long wail  suddenly cut 
"Marches:  the  Buckland  (see  beginning of Chapter  V,  Book  I);  and  the "
Sam 
been mixing in strange company. What's come of his weskit? I don't hold with 
"capable of  an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They  found "
"mushrooms  and bacon, besides much other solid farmhouse fare. The  dogs lay "
token  than the green stone of Galadriel. 'I  have come because Gandalf begs 
breast. Cold and  hard it  seemed as  his  grip closed on it:  the  phial of 
There now seemed  hardly a sound  in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing. 
"     'I should not shout, if I were you,' said Merry. It does more harm than "
     The face of Denethor set  hard and cold. 'You found Boromir less apt to 
####-     ent. 
and 
"to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth! "
flying smoke in the wind. 
     silivren penna mnriel 
again. 
"Oralla Calcut,4041378667794,24-01-2000
"
on  the  fields. A sortie must be made  ready.  Let it be of mounted men. In 
Isildur alone. 
"     'Do not judge  the counsel  of  Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said "
"the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf. "
     Whispering fell the beechen leaves 
"     There  were  many  Bagginses  and  Boffins,  and also  many  Tooks  and "
at  them in wonder and dismay as they passed by.  Turning westward they came 
"Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.' "
"of  rock  under  my  elbow  again! Now, I will leave you  two together for a  "
"exceeding  his  size,  and  if  I may  say  so  possessed  of  good  luck  far  exceeding  the "
"and breathed on them,  and then  he crushed them, and straightway  a  living "
"sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was the sound of a  "
"Alistair Palomba,4041373273887,04-12-1994
"
"wood, if Gimli had allowed it. "
"stone from stone, his  orcs have  taken away  my greatest fear. The out-wall "
"     'That you certainly are not,' said  Gimli. 'But what did I say? Mortals "
"eaten  his  people  like  a wolf  among  sheep,  and where  are  his  sons'  sons  that  dare "
as he could. 
crept into  holes  to  find  the young; it slipped  through windows  to find 
"very  weak  and  wobbly  in  the  legs.  ""Why  ever  did  I  wake  up!""  he  cried.  ""I  was "
     And makes her wave her tufted tail 
"Sarita Mewrcik,4041373716687284,26-07-1981
"
####-grow stale.' 
Ever there rose the same cry in the gathering  night: 'The King of the Dead!  
out  of the window.  Pippin glanced in  some  wonder  at the face now  close 
"Laurence Dalley,4331263986494,19-08-1998
"
"Brandywine, and  Woody  End,  and  The  Water  running  through  the mill at "
"Faintly  the  dwarves  heard  his  small  cries,  though  the  only  word  they  could "
down nearly to the  bottom of  the pit. Gollum was by  him. For a moment Sam 
"hands. They seemed to be carved out of huge blocks  of stone, immovable, and "
from the trap: and many of their own wolves were turning upon them and rending 
"steps led: one going on, as it seemed, up on to the high bank of the stream; "
 
"all seemed ruinous and dead, a  desert burned  and choked. They wondered "
road only by the will of Aragorn.' 
"Bake and toast 'em, fry and roast 'em "
"together,  of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the  gentle fall of the "
"Gibby Chatters,4017951109032,10-09-1977
"
""
so great is His strength and malice.' 
any rate while we're still in this valley. One more bite  and all the food's 
""
more of your mouth.' 
"####-little  love for those that go on two legs, and  yet are not in  league with "
had the sharpest eyes among them. 
"Sheffield Beinisch,4041372694403342,14-02-1990
"
"     'Well,  if  you  want my ring yourself, say  so!' cried Bilbo. 'But you  "
them; his foul breath  was on their cheeks. He began  to paw  them  and feel  
"Mountains  and the Greyflood,'  he said, `and  they have passed over Hollin.  "
"Rodge Mulloch,4041594283605652,01-09-1991
"
"some hint of doubt troubled them. Then Frodo's heart flamed  within him, and "
     There  was  a long silence.  At last Frodo  spoke  with  hesitation.  'I 
"in the darkness to  fix his eyes on, he felt less giddy. Leaning  his weight "
"     'No,' said Merry, 'I  haven't. I don't  know in the  least how far down "
"it's  anything,  it wil l  be some  little private trick of  his  own-that he "
there was no sign of any living thing. 
"road of old  to Moria from the  west  had lain along the course of a stream, "
its country over and over  again. He  said an odd thing at  this point.  'You 
"then broke and fled, this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But "
and a long; and  the  leagues that lie between here and  Gondor are a  small 
valley that lay between it and the outer buttresses of the mountains. In the  
"Hannah Paulucci,4835285024025041,09-08-1983
"
than iron-shod Orcs. Now we have a chance to lessen their lead!' 
"now well-trodden track came Gandalf,  leading  Bill with Gimli perched among "
with this  hideous  orc for long. He did what was probably the best thing he 
"harm. There  is something  happening inside, or  going to happen. Do you not "
"And  then on  again  through the Folde; and through  the  Fenmarch, where to "
     And  so the  red blood blushing in their faces  and their eyes  shining 
"     No such anguish  had  Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in  all "
trying to encourage him with clumsy words.  
"he went  first  to Minas Anor and  dwelt a while  with his nephew  Meneldil, "
"unafraid. 'Well, here goes, Master!' Sam muttered  to himself. 'I'll have to "
     Slowly Wormtongue rose. He  looked  at them with half-closed eyes. Last 
"Mechelle Emanuele,4017958356990,04-05-1999
"
"their names could be, as he had never seen half of them before. "
or spy was observing  them. Nothing  was to be seen  moving  on the hill. If 
"shall, if we sit here  - and know as we die that no new age shall be.' "
"rustling  and  crackling  and  creaking  (and  a good deal of grumbling  and drafting), "
"     No one  had  a  more attentive audience than old Ham  Gamgee,  commonly "
     'Would it? Would any of  you have believed me till now?' said  Strider. 
"     But he could not  go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could "
seen  of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of 
"flowers had begun to spring up, all the same kinds growing together as if they had "
"he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carried him  to the  bed "
"     Pursuing it with weary feet, "
"     `Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a  fine man as your brother was if I "
cliff that seemed to look out  over a sea of pale mist. There was a sound of 
"Doralia Faughey,4462691247543290,17-09-1981
"
"and the light failed, and the Sun was bleared, and all sounds in the City or  "
"a cry and sprang away. 'I can't stay here,' he said wildly. `I must go home. "
"     'We  cannot go any further,' said  Merry to Strider. 'I am  afraid this "
"questions, I will seek for the opening words. "
wild boar! ' 
with great press of men; and  the  drawing of the scimitars of the Southrons 
"Michaeline Rountree,4017959161562327,22-05-1998
"
"feeling itself  as  something between  roof-tip  and leaf-tip, between  deep "
they were lost in a sombre  country of dark trees winding among the feet  of 
"the stone upon it was red as fire.  Then those who were to go were glad, for  "
left him.' 
"comes.' Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door  was  shut.  The "
"it was not very far to go, and before long they came to a big rock standing out into "
     Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or two from 
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of 
"little of Men, and sly though he  is, your refuge is so  hidden that perhaps "
pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep  it hid and not to use 
turret  and  disappeared. Then  Shagrat halted. Out of the eastward door Sam 
willow and listening  to that horrible dry  creaking  voice laughing  at him 
"for a meeting here this Wednesday tea-time."" "
"Cathe Giottini,4041370339437550,29-04-1979
"
"     The hobbits  did not pay much attention to all this,  and it did not at "
the  barrel  on  top  of  him. He  came  up  again  spluttering  and  clinging  to  the wood 
"Beniamino Giovannetti,4017951462258,10-01-1981
"
at the foot of the  mountain  was  the  dell  from which they had started to 
just a tiny bit. 
have 
recreant!'  Then two of them ran up the steps to  him. Swiftly he snatched a  
"at once they were admitted,  silently, and without question. Quickly Gandalf "
     The  Company  now  took  their leave  and  returned to their  pavilion. 
times!' 
arrow; then darkness fell suddenly. 
"     'No, they  never  end  as  tales,' said Frodo.  `But the people in them "
####-your beloved  holes again. By  the White Hand! What's the use of sending out 
"Cassy Quayle,4041378294167294,08-08-1981
"
wide. And out of the gate an army came. 
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad 
"Kellby Rosoman,4041379304926,14-12-1993
"
     Shagrat made no reply. 
"afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the strange trees were "
"They gazed out with solemn  eyes, but they were not  looking at the  riders:  "
"Thorstein Nunns,4041591901024084,27-02-1979
"
"they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and  that  a  "
"corner,  without  listening  to  old  dwarfs  thanks  (which  he  felt  he  had  hardly "
"gnaw, but he wanted something softer.  "
####- 
"Brewster Connors,4041377559489,16-05-1979
"
"     'Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of "
"may  have something  yet to do? But for him, Sam, I could not have destroyed "
"Face! And they tell  H im everything. He sees, He knows. Ach, gollum, gollum, "
hand  there was  a white staff. The  head was so bowed that he could see  no 
"flood was released.  If I may say so, I added a few touches of  my  own: you  "
by an unseen host that followed in the dark. 
them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or  movement in the night.  
power and majesty of the  kings  of stone. For a moment it seemed to the eyes 
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.' 
"But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and  Saruman does not "
roamed over Eriador as far as Weathertop while the  others were still in the 
change.  Yet  if  they  had  known  more  about  it  and  considered  the  meaning  of  the 
"pale cold  eyes,  and  catch  small  frightened or  unwary  things. He  grew "
the Orcs  had turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo  and  he  had 
"little. 'There was poor  Mat Heathertoes, and  Rowlie Appledore,  and little "
     till the dark lord lifts his hand 
those  that you  wear now.  A modest plan.  Hardly one in which  my help  is 
     'And we also have few. Now  would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of 
"Thorin and Company, if you don't expect too much. "
####-with very  little  rest. Hour after  hour for nearly three weary days he had 
"the sons of  Elrond bring  to  me  from their father in Rivendell, wisest in "
"sun  that had  the  luck  to slip  in  through some opening  in  the  leaves far above, and "
     `But I am going to Mordor.' 
"and  their toes,  just  freeze  on  to  rock;  and  they  tear  it  up  like "
     'And what are they?' 
"could see a sad look in his eyes,  sad but not unhappy. There was a light in "
"Mountains,  and we  have  to  get  through,  or  over,  or  under  those  somehow,  before "
"afterwards. And people will say: ""Let's hear about Frodo and the Ring! "" And "
""
and a savage look like a dog that has been chained and forgotten in a kennel for a 
"Lynnette Shrigley,4041591892783755,14-02-1987
"
"that clothed us as  you see  us, in elven-grey. This   brooch is of  the same "
postpone the day of evil. He  is far away. We could not now take  it back to 
"trouble of all the western world. The Ring! What shall we do  with the Ring, "
"Bilbo  was  sitting  beside  a  warm  fire  in  front  of  a  large  tent,  and  there  sat  too, "
"South. 'It is long since the beacons of the North  were lit,' he said;  'and "
"fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to do?' "
the end the tunnel. 
"     'Can't say as I'd be sorry to see  it,'  said Robin lowering his voice. "
"overhearing the  elusive discourse  of their  elders, and wondering  how  it "
"But I count now every hour, indeed every minute. Farewell!' "
"Romain Marti,4017959157827,13-09-1998
"
"Somehow  or  other  Fili  was  got  on  to  the  branch,  and  then  he  did  his  best  to "
"and Men."" But I hope that the Ents may have found time to brew some of their "
"Cecily Tander,4041379787177329,04-03-1997
"
"than genealogical lore) was far from general among them,  but there remained "
     He opened an eye and tried gallantly to  smile. 'Who's this young giant  
of the dwarves round it cooking and making a fine roasting smell. The eagles had 
"Alyse Francecione,4041590405585,05-02-1985
"
Eagles are not kindly birds. Some are cowardly and cruel. But the ancient race 
"Boromir had blown his great horn till the woods rang,  and at first the Orcs "
"by  within my hand's reach, yet I durst not handle it. It waded  deep, as if "
began  merrily  in the  hills and fell softly down into  silence; and in the 
"     'There is  Gandalf, and Thjoden and his men!' said Legolas. 'Let  us go "
"Reuven Walmsley,4017953322617,03-12-1991
"
of the hobbits rose again a little in spite of weariness: the  air was fresh 
     `Hi!' cried Sam  in  an  outraged  voice.  'There's  that Ted  Sandyman 
"""Ask us! ask us!"" said Gollum. "
"Si Blatcher,4033028401203,05-11-1996
"
and busied himself with building and kindling a fire; but Aragorn sat silent 
 
"Harris Newcomb,4041370461073751,27-08-1994
"
"     Out of doubt, out of dark to the day's rising "
"Deerdre Heathfield,4920129003500986,12-03-1994
"
"Thing's on him,  well, the Enemy  will  get it. And that's the end of all of "
"Sheila Bierman,4811794074574616,24-10-1978
"
fugitives  from  the South;  yet  it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of 
"Trula Josephoff,4041599883677092,06-06-1987
"
"Taber Pierucci,4041592066088,11-02-1997
"
"hither bank. As the dark drew on I  knew that  haste was  needed,  so I rode "
####-feeling that the day of the party would never come. 
"supped,' he said, standing at the door. 'Perhaps you would rather go to your "
other foul servants of the Dark Lord:  a  pit of uncovered filth and refuse; 
"     Together  they  carried  out Merry, Pippin, and Sam.  As Frodo left the "
"'Did I  not say to you: if  you pass the doors of Moria, beware? Alas that I "
beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not  remain here long.  
"     'No, not any clear notion, Sam, ' Frodo answered. 'In Rivendell before I "
more 
pits lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken  rock and 
"     'When did I first begin to guess?' he mused, searching back  in memory. "
"Wormtongue rose up, drawing a hidden knife, and then with a snarl like a dog "
"The scarves  were  removed and  their hoods drawn back, and they blinked and "
""
     `Who made the flood?' asked Frodo. 
"times,  written  in  his spidery hand,  and labelled  on  their  red  backs: "
don't  know  how you feel with small rag-tag  dangling  behind you; but  the 
"They  had  escaped  the  dungeons  of  the  king  and  were  through  the wood,  but "
bell clanged; and from the Watchers there went up  a high and dreadful wail.  
"from  the land of the Halflings,' he said. 'He came with  me. But let us not "
fell like  clear  jewels  of blended  word  and melody. `It  is  a  song  to 
"""One  question  at  a  time-and  none  till  after  supper!  I  haven't  had  a  bite  since "
"were starving."" "
     'There's so much  water  in the air that I'm coming into the kitchen to 
"Rivendell in the last week  of September. As I knew  he  was at your side, I "
"Gnni Dussy,4041596692772,21-06-1982
"
"     'Yes indeed; the  sooner the better,'  said  Merry.  'And don't be  too "
"pierced  moss  and mould,  larches were  green-fingered, small flowers  were "
"madness or devilry is this? Death, death, death! Death take us all!' "
"him, we shan't leave him.' "
"him  when,  lifting its head, it  saw him;  and  Sam  could hear its gasping "
tattered before they broke free at last. 
smoke rose on the borders of Lurien. 
     meres of Morthond under mountain -shadows. 
"     'I looked  at him and wondered.  ""But if I am  not deceived,""  said  I, "
"pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes  glittered,  and they "
"how long it would  take me on  my  own  feet,  with fair  weather and no ill "
"Durante Terbeek,4041377716691,10-09-1989
"
"the trees were beeches. They were at first inclined to be cheered by the change, for "
your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me 
"     'It is not for you, Saruman!' he  cried in a shrill and toneless  voice "
     Twice that day they  rested  and took a little of the food provided  by 
"behold!  upon  the  foremost  ship  a great  standard  broke,  and the  wind "
ring. He was  very  pleased with  his discovery  and he concealed it; and he 
"     Mablung  laughed.  `I  do not  think  the Captain will leave you  here, "
"""What  about  the  horse,  then?""  said  Thorin.  ""You  don't  mention  sending  that "
"     'Maybe,'  said  Faramir. `Maybe you discern from  far away the  air  of "
"     'At  once!' cried Frodo.  'Why,  I thought  you were staying  on for at "
     Needless  to  say - not that Tom's threat  sounded  very  serious  - the 
"Fredelia Penticoot,4308555081606,27-05-1989
"
Quickly  now  to  the  top  of  this  rock  the  eagles  swooped  one  by  one  and  set 
headless.  
"     'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor  "
can't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B .s 
"matter  of  sitting up late,  especially when there  was a chance of getting "
be jogging on in search of a camping place.'  But even as he spoke he turned 
"     Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver  "
single white stone  flickering like a frosty star. Riding slowly behind on a  
     The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.  
spring-cleaning.' 
"     The  sun was now  high, and  it  shone  down through the  half-stripped "
Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax:  he is willing to 
     Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen; 
"by  all his  relations.  They kicked him, and he  bit their feet. He took to "
"     'There  were no dwarves  nor children,' said Jomer. 'We counted all the "
"     Their mattresses and  pillows were soft as down, and  the blankets were "
"seemed, he and his fellows had vanished into the glooms, never to be seen by "
crowded and more watchful than before. 
####-two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they 
"     'Hail,  Gimli Gluin's  son!' he cried.  'I have  not had  time to learn "
at Bag  End  the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the  
"if  you don't want  to  stay in the  Lockholes any longer than you  need,  I "
"meats  they'll  take, if they can get no better, but not poison. They've fed "
remained for one day; and the day after they came to the green fields of the 
"in, advancing  their  spears. 'I  would cut  off your  head, beard and  all, "
put on  speed. The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a  few 
"before them,  and the stream  beside them went down with a  cold  voice over "
"swiftly known in Isengard; for your  land  was  open, and strangers came and "
"but no sign  of  age was upon  them, unless it were  in  the depths of their "
"chief  thought was:  ""I've  done  it! This will  show  them.  'More  like  a grocer  than  a "
have 
be seen all round the house but  falling  water.  Frodo  stood near the open 
"unfurled the great standard in battle. It was a great  day and a great hour, "
made  the great mistake of  leaving them out of his  calculations. He had no 
the tumult. No one heeded him. 
everything afresh. 
pillars  leaning  drunkenly this  way and that. At the rim of the  shattered 
     as wind in the morning. War was kindled. 
"     At  dawn  they made ready to go on. The light came grey  and pale,  and "
"leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on  his right, and  the thin clear "
"Bifur gave a cry: ""My cousins! Bombur and Bofur – we have forgotten them, they "
before  I  found  a  place  where  the  river  was  wide  and  shallow  enough  for  me  to 
them it seemed at  least a week  since they had eaten. They did not  sing or  
"they plunged over a fall of green-hued  stone, and foamed  down into a dell.  "
"knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in  the end to  "
"southward road; and after that they went  on more quickly, though the danger "
"that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair white  loaf to one who "
"Zorah Duck,4528949905299,09-07-1981
"
"Chaddie Seery,4017959167651,23-04-1979
"
"     'We might try  to hurt or  frighten  this tree to begin with,' said Sam "
and Written down. The  greater families were  also concerned with  events in 
though its light was on  the  tree-tops. The  leaves  were  all  thicker and 
his mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous turned loose as 
Following  him they descended quickly from the high shelf and made their way 
"steep-climbing  woods, and  talking softly. They  spoke no more of the small "
"wind, and gather our  strength-for  the last lap.' For so  he felt it to be. "
"a large sheltered garden, and new holes were dug in the southward face, back "
"     `But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers of Elrond "
"pleas and its commands without  an effort  of mind and will, so long as  its "
"####-""I will  take your gift, O Bilbo  the Magnificent!"" said the king gravely. ""And I "
"####-This was dreadful talk to listen to, not only because of the brave woodmen and "
"will regretfully inform  you  that there is none in the  House, and  he will "
"see a little north of this spot.  And  others, too, came out  of the forest. "
"where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like  gnarled  dragonets "
"Star Tregoning,4041378773862985,17-12-1983
"
     'The hobbits!' cried Gimli 'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?' 
""
"feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls felt, "
"already the gate was blocked with a wall of squared stones laid dry, but very thick "
were hung. In the meanwhile he had to rescue them. The worst part of the job was 
""
     So the third day of their pursuit began. During  all its long  hours of 
"looked on some  old story far  away), it moved the hand inch by inch towards "
"Leanora Mallebone,4017952098382,13-12-1988
"
"places.  The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after  dark,  and that also "
"Strider, he's been asking  questions, too. Tried to get in here  to see you, "
     They  gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find  
"her  mind  in agony. Then turning her maimed head away, she rolled aside and "
     And take the hidden paths that run 
     And gave him the boot to larn him. 
"ever  since  the  sun got up; but  there  is no  sign of him anywhere,  though we  found "
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or  
"grass,  and  chairs were set  for her and  for Celeborn.  Her maidens   stood "
"     'Galadr iel!  ' he said  faintly, and  then he heard voices far off  but "
away southward and eastward into the dim half-light. Mists curled and smoked 
"shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow slipped to "
"grey as the stones themselves,  and soft -footed  as hunting cats.  At length "
"anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the  little  box of salt "
"####-     `The  old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used  to hear tales "
"     'Here  lie  all the  Men of the Mark that fell  near this place,'  said "
"also clear that Tom  had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some  "
"followed us; but it may be that  he's lost us again, as you say. In this dry "
"virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.' "
high windows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors 
"like an impenetrable  wall of dark evergreen trees, trees of a kind that the "
"like a  rat, but  for all his efforts he could not scramble on top. Every time he tried, "
housed. 
for 
"Culver Grayland,4017953446419437,10-07-1993
"
morning  through the  shadows. The light broadened and hardened. The 
""
"battlement  upon  battlement, black, immeasurably strong,  mountain of iron, "
"meaning. It's  wonderfully  quiet here.  Nothing seems to  be going on,  and "
Tobold Hornblower  of  Longbottom  in the Southfarthing first grew  the true 
"the dark, until he was relieved by Legolas. "
that the  road was  held in  force against  them.  A  host  of the enemy was 
"     A great dark-grey horse  was  brought to  Aragorn, and  he  mounted it. "
"     'And  I  do not wish to know,' said Gimli. 'Let nothing that  dwells in "
battlements in the morning breeze' and high and far he heard a clear ringing 
passed by Lurien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair. We had not heard of 
you have  your proud  folk say of you: (There  goes a  lord who tamed a wild 
"Sig Blore,4041597159086907,28-01-1998
"
"mire  of  reeking  mud and foul-smelling  pools. When all  was  ordered, the "
     Then the whole  company  began to  run  with the long loping strides of 
"think of any of your  Gaffer's hard names,' he said. 'You were worn out, and "
"there, aren't you?' "
"With  that  the  messengers  departed  swiftly,  and  the  dwarves  were  left  to "
sleep. So  the Wargs  had  no  intention  of  going  away  and  letting  the  people  up  the 
"the face of the king, fallen in the midst  of his glory, For Snowmane in his "
and the Yellow Face won't see me.' 
"turning through north to north-west during the night, and now it failed. The "
feel  as  if I had been caught between  a hammer  and an anvil.' He  said no 
"Moina Spadelli,4041373274471,27-01-1996
"
"the wrists,  and his hands were  in front  of  him. He could  move them both "
far 
pale sky. As  they  lay  in their  camp that day Aragorn watched the flights 
lit  at  the  fire  and  stuck  in  low brackets on  the pillars of  the hall  about  the  central 
Speech. It was lying lopped and  dead in the field. As if this was the  last 
"they  are  simply  stiff  with  goblins,  hobgoblins,  and  rest  of  the  worst  description. "
"Adina Southerell,4017954356143,05-07-1990
"
"was merry again, as merry as if he did not remember the blackness of the day "
them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity the re are so few of us!' 
""
""
"     The hobbits had been nearly  two  months  in the House  of  Elrond, and "
disappear  quietly  and  quickly  when  large  stupid  folk  like  you  and  me  come 
"Owen Dumbrell,4571129375073,03-07-1992
"
obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's time 
their bodies show in the little flicker of the flames. Worse still it brought thousands 
The hours passed in  a weary stumbling trudge with a few brief halts. At the 
"The lakes shall shine and burn, "
mercy. 
"were foundering in a gathering sea. The sun gleamed red, and under the wings "
"health, and they patted him on the back, and they made a great fuss of him; which "
"Tracey Cluse,4017959524717030,28-09-1978
"
     Chapter 2   The Land of Shadow   
"Abigale Whife,4416057413260472,22-09-1984
"
"the corner of his  eye, he had a glimpse of something falling from the crag, "
different as peas and apples.' 
Merry  heard voices  in front speaking softly.  Out-riders had come back who 
"     'None here can do so,' said Elrond gravely. `At least none can foretell "
"stones  faded slowly  from sight,  but still beyond them,  blacker than  the "
"Milka Ciccotti,4217449941567968,16-01-2000
"
"     'Yes, we will set out together,' said Aragorn. 'But I do not doubt that "
either! I am  not a fighter.  But it  would be politer in any  case for  the 
"yes, with nasty cruel steel.' "
burned him.' 
"Noe Timbrell,4548862406695,31-01-2000
"
"him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished  into thin air, in a manner of "
"now,  whither  you will. But  then, if ever we  meet again, I  shall not  be "
"for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now "
"evening  they were so eager  to press on,  for Beorn had said  that  they should  reach "
""
"he could see what was  going on: they were not waving in the wind, they were "
"Giustina Fried,4017958675148748,01-01-1998
"
the  coming menace was unmasked at last.  The radiance of the star -gla ss was 
gently to his breast. 'And you're with me.  And  the journey's finished. But 
"     That name  the hobbits  only knew in legends  of the  dark past, like a  "
"     Gandalf  was thinking of  a  spring,  nearly  eighty years before, when "
heir. 
"beautifully for you, a perfectly beautiful breakfast for you, if only you won't have "
"great  credit  on  your  grandfather,  but  you  cannot  pretend  that  you  ever  made  the "
"Robbi Rippin,4017954396571896,07-07-1996
"
"to name a single strand of your hair, which  surpasses the gold of the earth "
Beregond and the Lord's servants that stood there aghast.  'And so pass also 
have  already been  told that you  are  the  kinsman and adopted heir of our 
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can't  
"blade, and I do not fear either pain or death.' "
"killing; not even of the ruffians, unless  it must be done, to  prevent them "
"Martino Cuningham,4041592538721381,04-12-1982
"
turned aside. 'Stay!' he shouted. 'Do not follow me yet!'  He ran quickly to 
"Fernandina Aloshikin,4175447827967203,17-09-1977
"
and so like was she in form of womanhood  to Elrond that Frodo  guessed that 
"Jeanna Gumery,4017953984507,25-01-1986
"
"almost as straight  as  a stretched ribbon down, down, into the West. There, "
shall ride  with  him to honour  the fallen.  But now before  you go  I will 
looked at Frodo doubtfully. 
"in honour less than  any shepherd's cot. And what of the king's esquire, the "
not know what it was about. 
and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow. 
stoutly and untruthfully. 
"say. But that's not the  way of it with the tales  that  really mattered, or  "
"listened,  till  at  last when  the  stars  began  to  peep  forth,  it  silently  spread  its wings "
the ground and echoed in the mountains.  Then  with searing suddenness there 
light and shadow flowing  through the grass as the Moon  went westward.  And 
trees  at  the  end  of  the  Red Book of  Westmarch  are  a  small book  in 
""
"     'Very very good, eh, my precious? Let's be  good,  good as fish,  sweet  "
meant more than it said. 
####-when you're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.' 
would discover that  we had thrown  down  Saruman and had  taken the  Stone. 
still. 
"ago.  But  there  is  somebody  that  I  know  of,  who  lives  not  far  away.  That "
"over  him, so intent  upon her victim  that she took  no heed of Sam and his "
"were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made  for a while less dangerous;  but "
"your old coat and put on this!"" "
oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind  and body. 
sure of  you. The  Enemy has set traps  for  me before  now. As soon as I had 
"and black amid the shadows, thrusting westward. "
"pressing.  Here at least is  my sword, goodman Hbma. Keep it well. Glamdring "
than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on 
"Out  of  a  dark  opening  in  a  wall  of  rock  there  issued  a  boiling  water,  and  it "
"that  he wore, and so  the name  which it was for etold at his  birth that he "
"was in his legs than when he was going down, but still he clutched the cup, and his "
"had, we  shouldn't know, because they'd have  been  forgotten. We hear about "
"return to their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in "
passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they were welcomed again with 
"There he saw nobody, but all the signs of a large and hurried breakfast. There was "
"     `Where have you been, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. `Have you seen Frodo? ' "
"with the Lady at the end, they say.' "
host that comes from the North?' 
     in chain‚d rings he armoured him; 
tumbled skirts lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not  even 
"come  to  a  bad  end,  if  you  go with  such  friends. Thief Barrel-rider. I don't mind if "
"tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always it displeased him "
"Christy Mennear,4041377321059656,11-05-2000
"
"than  ever,  and much wealth went  up  and down the Running River; and there was "
slaughter that lay about all. Fire and smoke and  stench was in the air; for  
"again. `You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should  pardon "
"them  pretty  easily  the  night  before,  but  that  had  been  unawares  and  in  the  dark. "
"them westward. I came also  upon two others, but they turned away southward. "
flared in  Anurien  and Thjoden came to Harrowdale I stopped.  Foresight had 
you 
me brag and abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!  
then certainly the  Ring would have  been seized and used against Sauron; he 
"     'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?' asked Merry "
"     'Hadn't we better clear out quick, Mr.  Strider?' he asked impatiently. "
"voices talking, still  some way above. More than  one rat remained alive, it "
"Luis Blatherwick,4041371638560,14-06-1999
"
"you  fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend can help you. And "
"Abey Hastings,4020561716297345,01-07-1999
"
"rose  steadily  through every limb, bringing  refreshment  and vigour  as it "
"the Southfarthing away in your Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You are "
"down from  the  Hornburg. The  rampart loomed suddenly  before  them, a high "
"     The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and Gimli; for  "
"out, but no one could touch  yours. Oh  no!  Gandalf would look  after  your  "
"mean,' said Frodo 'It would be a  great  comfort to  know that he was on the "
should be  done with it? Those  things I must decide. But I spoke yet of  my  
"     Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed  a fter him "
<br>
"wi th the king and  was sorely hurt, and dwells now in my keeping. But she is "
"a moss-gatherer, and I have been a  stone doomed to rolling. But  my rolling "
which 
"Yolanthe Newham,4041377891192366,23-12-1998
"
"story: and  Frodo, to his  own astonishment,  drew  out the chain  from  his "
"you think  I'm so damaged  that it's safe  to flout me, you're mistaken Come "
"Merry.  'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that "
"no use grumbling. I tell you, it's no game serving down in the city.' "
last  heard  in  this  place.  I  have  been  sent  to  look  here  for  the  last  time.  Are  you 
"mode, but the  language is that of Mordor, which I will  not utter here. But "
Smokes  were  pouring from  it and while those that rose into  the upper air 
our very window. Does he think  that men sleep without watch all  night? Why 
bunched herbs. Almost Sam fell asleep as the  time went by. He let them stew 
"Olympia Meritt,4105817768793021,12-03-1994
"
"tongue  of  Gondolin;  it  was  a  famous  blade.  This,  Gandalf,  was  Glamdring,  Foe-"
openly attack a house where ther e are lights and many people -not until they 
say that  we should come through Sarn  Gebir  alive.  None have ever done so 
fought to  master himself and to drag himself out of the swoon that was upon 
"Corabella Joel,4041597786603017,11-02-1991
"
"     `Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and they are black swans.' "
"Brandi Fairfull,4459129313908,16-12-1989
"
themselves.  Tom  Bombadil is the Master. No  one has ever  caught  old  Tom 
side. 
"many miles out of your  way to bring tidings to Jowyn, and to speak with her "
the  shallows.  There  for  ages  his  huge  bones  could  be  seen  in  calm weather  amid 
"`A few minutes back. I hope  it was  only a bird,  but it didn't  sound quite "
####-river would be to blame. Now Boro -- ' He stopped and went red in the face.  
     And he answered: 'I have wished  thee joy  ever since first I saw thee. 
""
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used 
"Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where "
"Lani Hasty,4041596976084780,28-06-1997
"
"Matthieu Durand,4041595907346615,04-01-1986
"
"     'My people came out of the North long  ago,' said  Thjoden. 'But I will "
"He crept still nearer, and suddenly he saw peering between  two big boulders a "
""
"filled  with avenues, and  groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that "
advice about fire goes to the heart.' 
"     ' ""I will go to Saruman,"" I sa id. "
"Mazarbul!' he said grimly feeling the edge of his sword, And®ril. "
"the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to "
the  dreadful  infection of light  spread  from  eye to  eye. She  fell back  
     'And  I waited.  Until  that night when he left this house. He said and 
"Lawry Enser,4017955198764993,01-02-1997
"
"####-Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night  -  now, bless me! Where's your "
bones! What's going on? ' 
"Tyrus Walenta,4041373844791545,25-03-1997
"
"had a'known, this is just what I'd have  looked  for. These thorns must be a  "
"Alyss Goggan,4041591919089145,22-09-1995
"
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been. 
"wonder.  What's  The Pony to him, or mugs  o'  beer? Not  but what my beer's "
"Ki Abramin,4017955977284551,23-03-1997
"
"Nanice Gibbens,4236317421593688,04-12-2000
"
"as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo's  or better, ending "
"     All that is gold does not glitter, "
us back.' 
Smaug;  and  there we were unexpectedly  joined by my  father  and my grandfather 
turning in the depths.  
     his scabbard of chalcedony; 
     'There are some who would begin to doubt whether your  errand is fit to 
"Hamilton Karlik,4041599399843477,01-10-1995
"
ran noisily from step to step to meet them. On the right of the stream there 
"Candis Partrick,4017951048318486,03-01-1987
"
by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones. 
"####-divide, am sorry if you are worried about transport, and I admit the difficulties are "
"legs, and drinking in sips. "
"however, the road  ceased to roll up and  down: it climbed  to the  top of a  "
":father, and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg.  "
"the  bones  of  the earth. We can split stone like  the roots of trees, only "
"without  the  help  of  the  wizard  or  the  dwarves  or  of  anyone  else,  made  a  great "
"looped  backwards and forwards as it  climbed. Up it horses  could walk, and "
looked 
as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared in 
"Saruman hopes to go and come  unmarked, before long.  If you  will undertake "
thought he saw groves of trees. But they were  moving! Could it be  that the 
"Moved by  a sudden impulse he groped for a loose  stone, and let it drop. He "
"to  its southward  wall, and about  them was a  garden and a greensward with "
Complete Table of Contents 
to  take  a less grievous  matter:  it  has been supposed by some  that 'The 
ancient  tribes  that never went  to Faerie  in  the West. There  the Light-elves and the 
hall. I will now risk a little real light.' 
"slopes  rose  from  the  lip of  the dingle, and away beyond them, above the "
"take  a  share  in  the  guard  below,  while  Bofur  was  hauled  up  to  the  higher  camp. "
"Katinka Grigoli,4041372033225,25-09-1979
"
"     'There  wasn't  any  permanent  harm  done,  was  there?'  asked  Frodo "
"     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor does age lie so  heavily on your  shoulders as "
"any  trail to  right or  left, but here  a nd  there they passed single Orcs,  "
"hear, you had best listen to it.' He sat down with a snort. "
"Bev Rasmus,4804350981255,08-10-1997
"
 
"out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to "
""
they  had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded  in the deep  waters stood 
to be going the same  way as you are. I like  walking under the stars. But I 
     `Wraiths!'  he wailed. `Wraiths on wings! The Precious is their master. 
"     One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them, "
"     He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. 'Well, good  night to "
"meddle  in  the affairs  of Wizards, you  must  be prepared  to think of such "
"foe,  or weather in  a way that astonished those who did not know them  well "
"####-     As he  fell  slowly into  sleep, Pippin had a  strange feeling:  he and "
"Frodo's shoulder. 'I will help you bear this  burden, as long as It is yours "
"strong-willed  and proud, but old; and  his mood has been strange  since his "
"of  the  hills,  until they reached the flats  beyond. Then they  could make "
on into the growing dark. 
again  by the  faint rumbling as  of thunder far away or  drum-beats in some  
circling in the air. 
"you. They still have voices, and can speak with the Ents  -- that is why they "
Ents so  long as going over all the facts  and events that  they have to make 
"long we watched him only.  Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, "
Concerning Pipe-weed  
with scimitars of steel. Soon actual darkness was coming into a stormy sky; while 
 
""
"Then  shouldering their  burdens,  they set off, seeking a  path  that would  "
"Lorna Eatherton,4041597137264,02-08-1983
"
"Conway Cardinale,4610129276889,20-07-1989
"
"     `I'm sorry,' said Frodo; `but I can't help  you, I'm  afraid.  I  think  "
"stooping down; the brown  leaves  now stood  out  stiff, and rubbed together  "
"looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune. "
but he held his neck proudly and showed  no sign of weariness. Many tall men 
"     '  ""Have  you indeed, Gandalf the Grey! "" he scoffed.  ""For aid? It has "
"Vita Tresvina,4017955586078,12-12-1984
"
     'Ai! ai! ' wailed Legolas. 'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! ' 
as mourners beside a bed of death. Then Denethor spoke in a low voice. 
It may have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to.' 
"Catie Shrimptone,4969676661865871,10-01-1988
"
"Renell Clee,4017957380301204,06-07-1985
"
"gear and harness: nor did their  riders bear any badge  or  token, save only "
"and fitful light, the mymakil  of  the Harad dragging through the lanes  amid "
name  you  elf-friend  and  blessed. May  your  shadow  never  grow  less  (or  stealing 
"ridden with us, desiring to go to  the  war. We rode as swiftly as we  might "
####-     The new  'Chief' evidently had  means of getting news. It  was  a  good 
spoken  since they left  their hiding-place. 'We must go  that way.' Turning 
"     `Knock on  the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,' said Gandalf. `But "
the shadows we may meet again!' 
"guess that it was  hands, because the riddle then becomes easier,  and  also "
"time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,  as sleep  was "
"""Most  likely Fili,"" he  thought by  the  tip of a  long nose poking out of  the winding "
"Uruk-hai. It was  his duty to wait upon the Lord, and wait he did, forgotten "
fall  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  beside  them  on  to  sharp  rocks  below;  but  each  of 
"roof of the Town  Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor,  and the "
through the City. 
     Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to me!'  
     An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and 
"follow me."" "
Suddenly  a  sword  flashed  in  its  own  light.  Bilbo  saw  it  go  right  through  the 
"charge Merry had  been borne unharmed behind him, until the Shadow came; "
but the  slim moon was already falling westward. They were on the  edge of a 
"see  the  waterways of Dale,  Frodo, and the fountains, and  the pools!  You  "
us both together one day and judge between us!' 
"     With hearts  strangely  lightened they  now rested again, but  not  for  "
"     'It  may not matter much,' he  said apologetically, 'but I would rather  "
"####-     Frodo looked again towards the Mountain. 'No,' he said, 'we shan't need "
"come.' He signed to  one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle "
"     Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way, snuffling and "
good pace. 
come and heard  the early night-wind whispering among many leaves. Then 
success. 
"thought  to the rhyme and to  the words  Isildur's  Bane, since Boromir went "
"""Don't talk to me!"" said Smaug. ""I know the smell (and taste) of dwarf-no one "
translated  the thought  to himself. Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in 
     And before the Sun had fallen far  from the noon out of  the East there 
"     'Good  night,  my friends!  ' said Galadriel.  'Sleep in peace! Do  not "
"to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where Smjagol helps. nice "
"     The leading company was halted, and as those behind filed up out of the "
"such as  the Galadhrim used,  longer and  stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, "
     `But how will  that help us?  ' asked  Sam. `Surely the Enemy knows all 
"and their finery,  and  their wonderful  parties. 'Lordly' folk called them, "
""
"white horse. 'Take  all  these things,' she  said, 'and  bear  them  to good "
light over grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.' 
"to make a pyre and  burn him on it, and Faramir as well. And he has sent men "
"Forest since the wars of Sauron and the Men of the Sea.  It is the orc-work, "
"'The snow is growing less,' he said, `and the wind is quieter.' "
going  to  be the  worst there ever was. We shall  wish  we were down a deep 
     The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped  out of 
"get the huntsmen  to shoot.  They  would probably get  close  enough,  while "
"Hobbiton gang any time  now, I  think. They  won't come just to  talk things "
come.' 
"edge of a rock -fault, was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply  down. "
"""Good  heavens!  Can  you  ask!  Goblins  fighting  and  biting  in  the  dark, "
of the meeting of Beren son  of  Barahir and  L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was  a 
sense of urgency which  he did not understand  came to Sam. It was almost as 
"been  that  way  twice,  when  I  knew  there  was  a  dragon  at  the  other  end,  so  I  will "
"nearest  mountain,  a  wide  land  the  colour  of  heather  and  crumbling  rock,  with "
"take a straighter road to Isengard,  or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you  "
"His crown shall be upholden, "
not know what they are about: possibly there is some trouble away south from 
a  stand  in  the hall  (until he  lent  it  to  a Museum). His gold  and  silver was  largely 
"evidently had  a very narrow escape,  and the  hunt was hotter on our tracks "
     But  lo! suddenly in  the  midst of the glory  of the  king his  golden 
     Chapter 5   The White Rider  
have hurried back quicker.' 
"now,' he said in  a low voice.  'There  seem only to  have  been five of the "
"higher,  until it  reached  a  region  above  the  wind  and  spread  in  an "
indeed he did not know where in the world to go without them. He could not keep 
my story there is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possible in a  
"wet  clothes  all  the  night. Others  said:  ""These  parts  are  none  too well known, and "
our doom seems certain to them. 'The king the king!' they cry. 'We will take 
there many  golden  harps  strung with  silver  they  took  them  and  struck  them;  and 
"Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never  I thought any dwarf could. Riding is "
"came  upon pools, and  wide  stretches of reeds  and rushes filled with  the "
alone and silent. As they passed her they  turned and their eyes watched her  
"     'Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,' said Treebeard. "
"Danger ous. I should be terrified of meeting them, if there were no true Ents "
considering weighty plans of change. There is work to do. I serve you still-though 
"you ever got out, but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not "
"into  the  tower, to discuss  deep  things beyond their comprehension in the "
"it, nor to  permit any other to lay hand on  it. In this elvish heath dwells "
"killing two hobbits, and then  scattering across country in the direction of "
Gollum talking about? What useful thing could he keep out on the dark lake? But 
"alone,  and  always  in  hiding,  never  daring  to  take  off  his  ring,  hardly  daring  to "
     `Nay! ' said Legolas. `Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world 
well-pleased; his eyes gleamed with malice and amusement. 
"shall  acknowledge her  the fairest of  ladies, or our friendship will end.' "
"     'What  will Ferny sell,  and what has my accident got to do  with him?' "
"reason I would  have slain him  before,  forgetting the law of the hall. But "
"you all,' he said. 'It's been a queer day, and no mistake. But all's well as "
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony 
immediately Sam was wide awake. The first thing he saw was Gollum  -- 
     It was made on  the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo  on  his 
     'Entwives?' said Pippin. 'Are they like you at all?' 
"Arch Peniello,4017951667985136,07-12-1978
"
"darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time in which "
"table. Wood was piled under it, and high all about it, and all  was drenched "
"Syman Boyda,4041598732055,25-12-1991
"
"pinned him. He  twisted round  like lightning,   all wet and slimy as he was,  "
"     `Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,' she a nswered, `and to  "
opened;  goblins  came  out  and  grabbed  the  hobbit  and  the  dwarves  and our  troop 
hearts.  Then  it was that  Gandalf  counselled  us  not to  assemble in the 
for it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to Elrond  and all 
"Germaine Summerskill,4041373123082,30-04-1986
"
"King's friend,  and one  of the most renowned in all the lands  of the West. "
"     'That's enough  from you,'  snarled  Shagrat. `I had my orders. It  was "
"     'Low,'  said Merry.  'We ran  off  with nothing but a  couple of  spare "
"Tower; and  the Shadow passed. Then  I  was weary, very weary; and I  walked "
     Before long the wood came  to a  sudden end. Wide grass-lands stretched 
"     And a voice  was heard  out of the  night that answered him, as if from "
"passed, and Sam saw that they were on a narrow  path that gleamed faintly at "
     `As  I stood there  I could hear orc-voices on  the other  side: at any 
"Gunter Curtiss,4017953052917,19-11-1985
"
the wall  beside the ruined  gate the Nazgyl sent out its  deadly cries. All 
their cares and  fear  the thoughts of  their friends  turned  constantly to 
     'What do you advise us to do?' asked Frodo. 
long 
"camp-cooking on their travels, when there was a  chance. He  still  hopefully "
"Behind it there hung a vast shadow, ominous as a thunder-cloud, the veils of "
"yourself down, if you want to! ' "
"was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East.  "
     and heard at last the weeping sore 
     There  was no answer. Sam  strode forward. Sting glittered  blue in his 
and bowed  low; for he  saw that here  indeed was one who had elven-blood in 
"great-the  lands  have  not  become  less  wild  with  the  passing  of  time,  rather  the "
"troubles him. He only  needs the One; for he made  that Ring himself, it  is "
"     'Good luck, Sam! '  he said. 'Many  have received worse  than  this  in "
"have become dark  to later  men.  And  Boromir, there lies in  Minas  Tirith "
"Tracey Jerrems,4041374266323411,14-04-1980
"
"voice,  and  the grimness left  his face, and  he looked   like  one who  has "
"     'And you can say what you like, about what you know no more of than you  "
"     'Begging  your  pardon,'  said  Sam. 'I don't  think you understand  my "
""
"five of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But  at any  rate "
"he saw, as Gandalf had promised, the dark mass of Mount  Mindolluin, the deep "
"     However,  in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant.  Indeed, if  it "
"     `When the Ringwraiths  swept  by, your friends ran up behind.  Close to "
horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.' 
"saw  there was nothing else for  it but  to obey  the general clamour, for  the moment "
"     'Hope does not remain,'  said Jomer. 'You will not find your friends on "
"possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in  the end. But he did "
have found myself.' Merry looked up and saw that it was the young Rider 
"Kahlil Gilardengo,4041373855451,01-07-1977
"
""
"bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh "
"were swept away. We were  outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the "
"     'Well, of all sorts together, there must have  been ten thousand at the "
shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go  carefully with 
"Grethel Gallear,4041590738480,18-07-1994
"
bright year in the woods.  
"Ashly Ebourne,4041370586372,07-08-1983
"
now he was borne down by the insupportable weight of Middle-earth. He 
"three  of his lads, Young Tom,  Jolly, and Nick,  hurrying towards him. They "
"answered  the  wizard  crossly.  ""If  you  must  know  more,  his  name  is  Beorn. He  is "
"     'With  your leave,  Mr. Frodo, I'd  say no! This Strider here, he warns "
be helped. I wonder if it's any good  trying  to finish my  book? But  don't 
"up,  sniffing  the air. 'What fun! What fun to be off again, off on the  Road "
"     'There  and  elsewhere  in many places,' said Faramir, and sighed. 'Alas "
"     `I said not  so; yet evil came,' answered Legolas sadly.  `Then many of "
"decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the  shore, "
"     'I will not, lady,' he said. 'For that I  could not grant without leave "
existed. 
your  father  wished  was  for  his  son  to  read  the map  and  use  the  key.  The  dragon 
"the fashion of your kind. But  you  must dig swift and deep, if you  wish to "
tale does not tell. 
"Edy Beneteau,4041371515974,16-08-1976
"
     `What's that? ' cried Gandalf.  He was relieved  when  Pippin confessed 
     As they walked lip the green path  from  the gate no light was visible; 
"     'In any case we  must be called at  dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off "
"     ,The valley  of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and it was "
that  had  happened  since  they  started  their  journey  that  May  morning  long  ago. 
"told you Gollum wasn't dead yet, didn't I?' "
accomplished. The general opinion was that catching a dragon napping was not as 
""
"     'I should  think you were making it all up,'  said Merry, 'if I had not "
"again  to cool them,  as the  day-heat grew,  and Frodo  saw that  they were "
"penthouse, it  seemed, built on  to  the north end  of the house). Its walls "
     `What then does the creature seek? ' 
"shadow of  the  trees,  running quick and quiet, and keeping out of  the sun; so soon "
"in. I will take Gildor's  advice.  If the danger were not  so dark, I should "
     It was dark and  lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of  Mordor  
Wind him in slumber and there let us leave him! 
"'Is  Jomer  here?' he asked. 'You come at last, but too late,  and with  too "
"Elena Bletso,4041598056410521,29-04-1982
"
"to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.' "
"specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain; "
was  glossy and seemed  to  have  the vigour of youth.  It  was  Sam who had 
"Rae Dorian,4242399295886481,10-03-2000
"
"him,  till  he  had  his  fingers  on  their  throat. Only  a  few  hours  ago  he  had worn  it, "
"     'Then let us defend it, and hope!' said Aragorn. "
alone was enough  to hold  them enthralled; but for those whom it  conquered 
"Riders,' he ended in a low voice. "
"deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more "
due only to the  whisperings  of  Wormtongue. It is an ill that no leech can 
     In the king's hand lying! 
"and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.' "
"Gillan Reen,4041593205727,03-09-1994
"
"they paced the long floor towards him, until they stood three paces from his "
     'Do  not bandy words in  your  insolence with  the Mouth of Sauron!' he 
the next  year  he gave a party  in  honour of  Bilbo's  hundred-and-twelfth 
"Hendrika Shemmin,4444640784944,30-09-1996
"
of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard. 
""
"on her  and  perceived  her unhappiness, it seemed to me that I saw a  white "
high. 
bursts!' 
ever. 
"man  opened  the  casket  and  held  aloft  the  jewel.  The  light  leapt  from  his  hand, "
Orthanc and see that none enter it without my leave.' 
"     One  by  one  Boromir and  Aragorn  carried the boats, while the others "
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.' 
all  the  spaces  between  the  tree-stems.  Very  soon  the  hobbit would be  caught  in  a 
     'You mean to go on with your plan then?' 
you to him.' 
"said Bilbo; ""though I don't suppose there are any people left there that trouble with "
"     'Come on, Mr. Frodo!' he whispered.  'One more  crawl, and then you can "
"captain and our banner.  The Dark Lord  has Nine. But we have One,  mightier  "
not Faramir only. 
"alone,  while men passed to and fro, going in to the king and taking counsel "
"the Precious. Good master, good Smjagol, gollum, gollum!' Suddenly he  began "
he exclaimed: 
"come and lend a hand?"" Lo and behold! there stood Balin and Dwalin at the door "
"     Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and  rolled him  over, and then "
"Harrie McGiffin,4041595968132,21-10-1976
"
"out  of the  back door, through  the garden,  and over the  fields.  When he "
"     'Which order  shall we  go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest  first, or quickest "
'Let me see - it was in the year that the White Council drove the dark power  
"the main host, and came, flying low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought "
"more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we shall feel properly grateful, when we are fed and "
"the  crest of  the  grey hill,  and a  sudden breeze blew in  their hair and "
"other needs were laden on a  pony, none other  than the poor beast that they "
"there shadows lay by night and day,  "
her gift.' He put his hand to his breast. 
"and  Gandalf  beside him, and  together  they looked out from the high place "
"a whip at them and yelled:  'Hi, you! Get up!' They did not answer, and with "
"     No harp is wrung, no hammer falls: "
"Edrendil's  star,  set amid  the  waters of my fountain. It will shine still "
Shadowfax with all honour: with greater  kindness than you have treated this 
"Said the first eye, "
not unlock. Whither does it lead? Why would he pass? None shall ever know!  
the  Ring from the day that  it passed  into his keeping. Every step  of his 
"Jasen Greenley,4041374935761645,09-02-1977
"
"sleep,  even  tucked  away  in  the  darkest  and  remotest  comers  he  could  find.  For "
draws nigh even  to  the  borders of Greyflood; and  under the Shadow all is 
"     'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,' said Gandalf. 'Yet "
of Minas Tirith have been  staunch  through long years  of trial. We do  not 
voice: it  was  blown away  from  him by  the willow-wind and drowned  in  a  
early and is yet young and pale.' 
he began to feel that adventures were not so bad after all. At  first they had passed 
"Verney Liebrecht,4276224083696117,04-02-1977
"
"Raeann Lamanby,4041594383622,14-08-1982
"
"bridge.  On  the  far  side Merry  and Pippin were set down, and there  they "
After all you have done. It is the horrible power of the Ring. I wish it had 
"paces the man stopped. He was  tall,  a dark standing shadow. Then his clear "
from the coming Dawn. 
"burned gently  now with the soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and "
"strengthen such strong places as you have, and there await the onset; for so "
"     'He felt better at once,' said Gandalf. 'But there is only one Power in "
one sniff and  let out a  yelp as if he had been slung: he put down his tail 
"sword; and  as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow whence it  "
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?' 
"secret,  for  he  chiefly  used  it  when  unpleasant  callers  came.  He  took  to  writing "
"####-many  have  died,  and  Smaug  has  destroyed  their  town.  They  too  think  to  find "
"on again. Down the other side of the great mound he climbed, and the spark of his "
""
"some  fern  at  the edge  of the fire,  and the fern blazing  up had set the "
"     `That is hidden,'  answered  Frodo. `Doubtless it will be made clear in "
"difficult. There  was some scattered clapping, but most of  them were trying "
if  by  rending  claws and  smeared  with blood;  slaver  dripped  from  its 
return to us in our  need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!' Gimli said  
"great  stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off  in  the "
"     `Now, Sam,'  said Frodo, `don't  hinder me!  The  others will be coming "
shortcomings of the new owners of Bag End. 
""
the Power that sat in  its dark hold beyond the valley  of  shadows. Already 
"bleak  land we  can't leave  many  footprints, nor much scent, even  for his "
      
anything.' 
Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft  and quick as shadows 
     But the pursuers were close behind. At  the  top of  the bank the horse 
"left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was a  gleam, too brief for "
"after adding  a few half-forgotten  rhymes that he  does not understand,  he "
"     Gandalf looked through the  gaping  Gate, and already  on the fields he "
So long  has the reach of our Enemy become! Alas! but now I perceive how his 
"them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great trees, creeping away "
say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have 
"point the  wall was little more than one league from the  City, and that was "
'Come hack unto the caverns old'! 
"Gondor was still wise, and skilled in the healing of wound and hurt, and all "
"valley below,  but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far "
"     The hobbits sat down gladly in  low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry "
"proved a nasty poser for Gollum. He hissed to himself, and still he did not answer; "
"     'Five nights ago,' said Aragorn. "
 
"from  the  hoard,  and  made  music  to  soften  his  mood;  but  their  song  was  not  as "
"     'Well, well, bless my beard!' said Gandalf. 'Sam Gamgee is it? Now what "
Girion; he is a grim man but true. We would see peace once more among dwarves 
"aren't forks!"" "
"tree to shelter from the onslaught of the rocks. Soon the danger was over, the slide "
"Anyhow. I've  got watchers  at every point, and  I'm  going to deal with one "
     'Bear away  from this unhappy place your comrades who  have fallen. And 
have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.' 
"yes. His Eye watches  that way all the  time. It caught  Smjagol there, long "
But ever more thickly the birds were gathering. Their companies came flying from 
"####-unexpectedly, like the ruts of great  giant-wheels or  wide moats and sunken "
"was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward  over them. "
"map  and  the  white  light  shone  through  it.  ""What  is  this?""  he  said.  ""There  are "
"Lyndel Switland,4041377860849632,25-10-1999
"
"Pattie Beaudry,4249911663648,12-05-1996
"
"     'Well no, the year's been good enough,'  said  Hob. 'We grows a lot  of "
were hurled over the  parapet faster  than men could cut them  or fling them 
"would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.' "
     'Oh  come!' said the lad. 'Then we are all men  here.  But how old  are 
"she'd have had him off to her larder long before, and there he'd be now. And "
"     `There is  even a chance that Dwarves are  there, and that in some deep "
followed slowly; behind  came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches 
"     As soon as the  whole company was assembled,  standing in a wide circle  "
"     At last they came to the  end of the black  mere, and  they crossed it, "
"the heads of  those who had  fallen fighting at Osgiliath, or on the Rammas,  "
"but  one rider outran  them  all, swift as the  wind in the grass: Shadowfax "
songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.' 
"     His  watch  was nearly over, when, far  off  where he guessed  that the "
"themselves, and Strider's description of them was not encouraging. "
stern voice. 'On the Precious? How dare you? ' he said. 'Think! 
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it 
"""No thank you!"" said Bilbo. "
that the orcs had  been shot down by others on  the battlements or hidden in 
left  my control and began to open!  I had  to speak a word of Command. That 
away on the borders of Fangorn. 
with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the 
you wisdom and mercy.' 
 
"     They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd. "
"greater. If the  Moon gave enough  light, we would use it, but alas! he sets "
"a belt of pearls and crystals. A  light helm of  figured  leather, strengthened beneath "
####-Eyes that fire and sword have seen 
"said; and  therefore whether we would or no, he took  it to treasure it. But "
"Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse. "
"Nicholas Brion,4165564797389010,30-05-1982
"
paths were little known except to the people of Rivendell.  
"hiding-hole,  and he seemed  better pleased with himself  than he had  been,  "
"     'I  hope so,' said Strider. Then  they all fell  silent, and one by one "
"clearer counsel, you should ask  Gandalf. I do not know the reason  for your  "
""
"     When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the West, "
"     'I have nothing  much to give to you young fellows,' he said   to  Merry "
fishy. 
doom.  Away  beyond the  shadows  at the western end of the  hall there came 
"coming down through the  ground or through thick walls,  an  answering voice "
"Isn't it delicious!"" "
"also one last surprise,  in  honour of Bilbo,  and  it startled  the hobbits "
"Speech, "
"Molly Bryning,4041594329146,20-08-1982
"
"many copies contain the  true account (as an alternative), derived no  doubt "
"renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and  make amends by helping "
"it  on the mantelpiece,  but  suddenly  he  removed it and  stuck  it in his "
"Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings "
"Ramona Austwick,4017950050144483,25-11-1975
"
"####-hobbit  had  rescued  his  companions  from  the  spiders,  and  was  determined  once "
"hobbits had bathed, they crossed the stream, climbed a long bank, and passed "
last Orc before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.' 
"####-those words before? Saruman spoke them, the teacher of Wormtongue. Though  "
"Hush! Hush! Oak, Ash, and Thorn! "
"Snowmane,'  he said. 'But at the least you shall ride with me to  Edoras and "
"eyries.  They  would  not  stay  here,  and  departed  with  the  first  light  of  morning. "
our  pleasant  little  party  with  the  Wargs  the  night  before  last.  And  now  I  think  I 
"Corby Farncombe,4017954134516,26-07-1984
"
"not long to  endure, amid the torment  of Orodruin. All about  it the  earth "
"Thatcher Lindhe,4041373051320475,09-10-1985
"
"I remind them of the old villain, if  they choose to  forget  him? I wish  I "
"`Up!  ' he said in  a hoarse breath without  voice. 'It all comes from here, "
and came charging round.  Soon the three companions  found  themselves  in a  
"must. We  can't  go  up  the  tunnels  so  hasty. We must  go  and  get  some  things  first, "
with friend; loyalty divided in  confusion of hearts.' Now he dismounted and 
You'd  put things  to  rights.  You'd  stop them digging up the  gaffer  and 
"a  rocky seat upon the black knees  of  the Ephel D®ath, stood the walls and  "
"     At  their last halt he sank down and said: 'I'm thirsty,  Sam,' and did "
"pickles!"" "
"us far  more,  altogether  and all the time. If  those two had seen us, they "
"now reach three feet; but they hive dwindled, they  say, and in ancient days "
'Let us go on.' 
"####-water, I'd shake his hand,' said Sam. "
"say. Some have  fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of course: and "
"     'Ah, alas!' cried Gluin.  'When will  the day come of our  revenge? But "
 
####-you must. Yet  do  not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown.  Rede oft is 
     `Look ahead! ' called Gandalf. `The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and 
"     The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad,  and  rather  short, cheerful "
"be  'queer'-except by his nephews and nieces on  the Took  side, but even  they were "
     'Peregrin Took!' he said. 'Come back!' 
""
perhaps.  He  may  be  shy  of  showing himself before many  different  eyes 
be cool and shady under  those mountains. The Sun could not  watch me there. 
"     'There's more to be done still,' said Merry. 'If  you're  right in your "
     'Who  comes hither  to disturb the rest of  Balin Lord of Moria?  '  he 
"Joana Gosneye,4017955317037,13-12-2001
"
"Muire Dugget,4108760249117,10-08-2001
"
"     Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the "
spear. Like  a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they fled. Wailing they 
"does so. Master said so, wise master.' "
"brought to light the Orcs  have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute "
     And in the mountains strayed. 
"backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there,  they  are the first  new thing "
Hill  and  found him taking the air at the end of our Row. I hope  he hasn't 
so that no orc or roving spy should learn of the movements in the hills. The 
"vain that  the  young hobbits  came with us, if only for Boromir's sake. But "
"half veiled in  winding cloud, there loomed the  island rock. Still dark and "
the hair off my head!' 
those under the spell. Fur some the spell lasted only while the voice  spoke 
of one  that  I  can't escape  is  worst  of all.  What a long  day it seems 
"on to the wall  from the Deep  behind; but in front  it  was smooth, and the "
"said  he.  ""I  can  give  you  a  day  or  two more.  Probably  I  can  help  you  out of your "
get ready.' 
thickets and wastes of brambles; sometimes round  the lip of a deep cleft or  
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last  stroll in the 
"happened for a long while). But in those days they sometimes used to go on raids, "
"                                  ""Yours deeply "
"Fifteen birds in five firtrees, "
"not what you say.  There is in her  and in  this land no evil, unless a  man "
""
"Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue, and looking up at the sky. "
"Gimli, unable to contain himself longer .  'You rascals, you woolly-footed and "
one of the slave-drivers spied the two figures  by the road-side. He flicked 
"H®rin, and T®rin, and Beren himself were assembled together your seat "
Captain  that  defeats us. Few  will stand and abide even the  rumour of his 
burning eyes. 
     'There you are!' came the answer. 'It's  all quite useless.  He said so 
An eye in a blue face 
"days  followed  days,  and  still  the  forest  seemed  just  the  same,  they  began  to  get "
"regions  of the Great Lands, but for the  most part they fell into evils and "
""
a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them  he 
threatening. Then  he saw that they were  indeed shaped and  fashioned:  the 
with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the spur's end and 
"road  ahead, or following them  from behind;  but the night passed, and they "
ground. 
"roof. They passed  through  this dim hall,  lit only by  the  fire and  the hole above  it, "
"grind  more  and faster, or  so he said. He's got other mills  like  it. But "
marshalled!' 
"     'Stir not the  bitterness in  the cup that  I mixed  for myself,'  said "
"the true  tale  out  of  Bilbo  after much questioning,  which for  a  while "
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here  and  there  upon 
"     Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, a nd if "
     He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself 
"wind had  died  and all  the air  seemed still. They  could see  little, for  "
     Gollum probably felt something of the same sort.  But  what went  on in 
"they  got  near Thorin  said:  ""No  rushing  forward  this  time! No  one  is  to  stir  from "
"Lynna Morde,4041590947636,16-11-1975
"
voice shook like a horn in the valley.  
"sheer,  high  and  impassable, frowning  over  the plain  below;  beyond its "
     Time  passed. At length watchers on the walls could  see the retreat of 
into  the  gloom  where  the  river  roared  stonily below;  his  desire for  
"Shelli Goldston,4064140050826,02-11-1991
"
"darkness  as black as the caverns in the  mountains, they came at last to the "
"were broken, but good,  still in their leaf-wrappings. The  hobbits each ate "
"Gandalf? In what  far  time and place did he come  into  the world, and when "
coasts have been  rid. Four thousands I sent marching from Pelargir  through  
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.' 
"are only a memory. If I were to meet one  still walking in this  world, then "
"All light went out of them, and they stared bleak and pale for a moment into "
honour 
Osgiliath before  its ruin. The three others were far  away in the North. In 
"     'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I  think. I could "
"Valli Zappel,4017954907613963,12-02-1996
"
"     'If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain,' said Sam. "
"turning  round, fearing  that some unknown thing would  crawl  up out of the "
     'Heavy have the  hearts  of our  chieftains  been since that  night. We 
"follows it  -- out,  out away over there.' He pointed south and east  towards "
so to a road running towards Ravenhill. There is (or was) a path that left the road 
####-he  had  noticed  that  such  weapons made  a  great  impression  on  goblins  that  came 
Lurien. 
     Trying to find  his way out. Bilbo went on  down to  the  roots  of the 
"     'All right,' said Frodo. 'Go on and we'll follow.' "
 
busy. Hobbits can work like bees when the mood  and the need comes on  
"over the River  could not be guessed  in the darkness, but when  morning, or  "
Thorin hurried up. 
are lost for ever now. And there are wastes of stump  and bramble where once 
indeed had dared  to abide them or  look on their faces in the hour of their 
"find Gandalf? In the thick of things, I suppose; and he will have no time to "
"Nancie Tapp,4041374568749,27-02-1988
"
called himself 'my precious.' 
"When  he  heard  this  Bilbo  was  all  in  a  flutter,  for  he  saw  that  luck  was  with "
to the Downs.  
"claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our widows and orphans?"" "
though a few went on to bump against the stony pier.  
over the  land  of  Rohan  into  the darkling West  under  the sickle  moon. 
""
"     'Nor would I,' he  said. 'Therefore  I  say to you, lady: Stay! For you  "
"Gabriel Churchill,4871219812823,12-12-1993
"
"Forest.  He turned round and listened, and soon  there  could  be no  doubt: "
"Obediah Botger,4017956995351,08-05-1996
"
running away up the Hobbiton Road; but they blew their horns as they ran. 
     'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will 
"####-begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story "
tap on the study window.  
darkness. But it was years ago. The path may  have vanished now; but perhaps 
called to him with fell voices.  
on  the old hill's head.  Yet once it was tall and  fair.  It is  told  that 
"shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him from  every side. Where "
"with wonder  and a feeling almost of pity,  as they loomed up  mournfully in "
glory in the days of its rising.' 
brought the lad back to live among decent folk. 
down a fall of stones and slithering  snow. The spray of it half blinded the 
and about a hundred windows. The  Brandybucks and  their numerous 
"Lonnie Caddock,4047259290909133,01-09-1999
"
about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and disappeared. 
among  Elves  and  Men  from  Mirkwood  to  Gondor.  They  cannot  be  quite 
"Front  Gate  and  routed  out  all  the  halls,  and  lanes,  and  tunnels,  alleys,  cellars, "
hobbits noticed nothing strange about this.  Then they gasped. There was  no  
"through  the midst. And  far  away,  its  dark  head  in  a  torn  cloud,  there  loomed  the "
came unexpectedly from Bombur.  
"Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their right, they went in single file along the "
"can do but  rest, while we may. I will  watch for a while now, Gimli. I have "
"then he  wakened from  his  dreaming: another gentle, unrecoverable dream of "
Elven-lords;  and that  is not  to be wondered  at in the sons of  Elrond of 
"""I don't, because I am not sending it."" "
and 
"grass, he  ran to  the tree. There he saw Merry's feet  still sticking out  - "
"Dragon in Bywater, and that's Green,' he said, getting a general laugh. "
"moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is  - a tidy "
fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into the  night  with Merry 
"the end  of  the passage, the inner side of  the under gate, as  he  rightly "
"     For a breathless  time  they sat there, silent  and  alert, with  their "
""
"the Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a white tree, from the "
"even if one had been found to match his stature, for there was no hauberk in "
"were in sight of the country where Bilbo had been born and bred, where the shapes "
     Frodo made  light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly for 
"to  resist.  On the  contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After  that "
things that I should like to know the truth of.' 
"for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall  "
"""Well, no. As a matter of fact there were more than two."" "
set their hands upon their swor d-hilts. 
that concerned me and my friends.  
out of  Westernesse; but  they were  dwindling fast and  the  lands of their 
deep-cloven. The orc-trail turned from the downs towards it. 
"     and still on gold here let them lie, "
searchingly at  each  of them  in turn. None save  Legolas and Aragorn could 
eastwards in the night.' 
"Abbie Skerme,4886191411402,09-07-1994
"
""
"Luce Hazelgreave,4041598087824294,04-02-1997
"
"alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he "
slowly but steadily downhill: the cliff-top was sinking towards the level of 
upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began to 
"     'They  seem a bit above my likes and dislikes,  so  to speak,' answered "
"     'Orc-mail  doesn't keep  these thorns out,'  said Frodo.  'Not  even  a  "
it back to him with a smile. 
     'Where's  Bob?'  asked the landlord.  'You don't  know? Well find  him!  
"walked like one who carries a load, the  weight of which is ever increasing; "
 
"stone. Then  his grey cloak  drew apart, and they saw, beyond doubt, that he "
 
"Emyn  Arnen in  honour  and peace, and in  the service of him  for whom  you  "
stone. He felt that black shapes  were advancing to smother him; but when he 
"as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria were after  us. Come now! A little "
"horsemen he came in the middle morning, riding as escort to a line of wains.  "
"would he leave it? And  then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor  "
wretched.' 
Gondor. 
force? And you escaped? And ran all the way -- to me! And here in the wild I 
"sure  of  him.  There's  a  good  deal  of  Stinker -the bad  Gollum, if  you  "
suspicious. Presently he stopped and raised his head. `Something's  there! ' 
"down at him. The wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there "
"Benita Cadden,4041598647031224,02-09-1995
"
"shook  him, seeing in  his thought the  mad fierce face of Boromir,  and his "
"before it; and then as  it drew near he thought that he heard, like  an echo "
they have penetrated the disguise?' 
"Madelin Kinghorn,4041593857261025,20-12-1980
"
####-then he fell into an uneasy sleep. 
"     'Maybe, we have a thousand fit  to fight on foot,' said Gamling, an old "
"broke  up  and  wandered  in  a  hundred  winding  courses,  or  halted  in  marshes  and "
"companies of the Rohirrim. He could smell the horses in  the dark, and could "
for above him as he lay he heard a hated voice. 
"white. About them lay many treasures, of  gold maybe,  though in that  light  "
"swift and noisily. Its bank was bare and rocky, tall and steep above the stream; and "
frightened  of  him-('What  about me  of  them?'  thought  Bilbo)-and any way  I hope 
     At last  they  left  the  village  behind. The  escort of children  and 
"     'I don't understand,' said Frodo. "
"Nickola Hesse,4041599432581738,10-08-1994
"
     `Indeed I saw  upon  the bridge that  which haunts our darkest dreams l 
"quietly, more as if speaking  to herself than to him: 'But the healers would "
"""Not  at  any  rate  until  the  songs  have  come  true!""  said  they.  It  was  easier  to "
"Gollum was  disappointed  once more;  and  now  he was  getting  angry,  and also "
"Buffy Sueter,4195959278291145,18-05-1990
"
it to his companions.  To  them his account was  that Gollum had promised to 
could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are 
""
had come upon him.  'It was  something  colder.  I think it was   --' Then he 
"-- and the  Silmaril  went  on and  came to Edrendil. And why, sir, I  never  "
"she  became  Mrs.  Bungo  Baggins.  Bungo,  that  was  Bilbo's  father,  built  the  most "
"Elrond's house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?' "
     He sat up and  looked about.  Merry was not  far away. They were by  the 
"blowing  on  the  hill.  'Send your guards down  to the stairs  foot,'  said "
     Then as quickly as he could he  cut away the binding cords and laid his 
""
waiting for sudden death?' 
"     He  turned  and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking round "
"While they walked, as swiftly as the hobbits could go, they talked in hushed "
"####-     'Then  Shadowfax  has found  his  way alone from  the far North,'  said "
"     Pursuing it with eager feet, "
"bear the name, since those  accursed words  came to trouble our counsels and "
"resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap  the Nazgyl, "
     'Do you not?' said the Rider softly. 'Then call me Dernhelm.' 
"go, bidding them farewell  with soft  voices. There was no laughter, and  no  "
have helped us. Wizards ought to know better: they do know  better. There is 
     A light from the shadows shall spring; 
 
Then  the  elves  of  the  valley  came  out  and  greeted  them  and  led  them  across 
"turns and doublings, to put off any pursuit. "
hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.' 
"Janaya Close,4041371187089,07-03-1992
"
"Butch Emsley,4547703895056126,28-02-1980
"
"Smaug  or  the  other  dragons  came  into  this  part  of  the  world,  and  before  the "
"bitterness, in debt to your mercy.  I hate it and you! Well, I go and I will "
"horn of Rohan, and give them all some music they have never heard before.' "
"him.  Slowly  he raised his head and saw her, only  a few paces away, eyeing "
"Hyacinth Longmate,4041592253587,28-01-1979
"
"all. Sheep  walked  for a while biting the  grass,  but soon the hills  were "
concerning the Lady in the Golden  Wood that lie still between us. And now I 
"happening away south in Rohan,  and what had  become of all the rest  of our "
"Joanne Noni,4152989449269259,01-03-1988
"
"was a wood  full of them all round Isengard by  that time, as well as  those "
Aragorn stooped and picked up something from the grass; then he ran back. 
"####-time Frodo  was still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible "
"     'As for  where I am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be  difficult to give "
be seen climbing steeply up; but  beyond the  lower  steps the darkness  was 
"     ` ""Stay a  moment! "" I said. ""We shall  need your help, and the help of "
"side to side, and would often have halted  to  listen to  the  sounds of the "
"Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and be content. Meddle not in policies "
sneaked  along  to  some huts  that he  could  see near  the water's  edge. He no  longer 
"midnight  and  clouds  had  covered  the  stars,  but  Bilbo  lay  with  his  eyes  shut, "
all  the  truth  to  Smaug.  In  fact  he  was  in  grievous  danger  of  coming  under  the 
"     'Yes, lord,' she answered; 'but not enough, I reckon, for all that will "
"####-muttered  something  about  supper,  ""and  where  shall  we  get  a  dry  patch  to  sleep "
have had among the bodies to find it for me.' 
"trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them "
Rohan. 
"greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a  worthy  Wizard, a master of "
"The ponies screamed with terror, burst their ropes and galloped wildly off. The "
not till now. The eyes in Orthanc did not see through the armour of Thjoden;  
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so  they 
"reek, and their brats roll on the floor among their dogs? Have you not heard "
"the despair  of  the  impassable Gate was behind  him,  he did  not feel  so "
army with  their wolf-allies  into  the  lands  shadowed by  the mountains might  soon 
taken in raids; and  soon also  there  was  a great gathering  of men out of 
"Jaime Lebreton,4733268786862,08-11-1986
"
Jomer held council in the watches of the night. 
were  for  the moment on top. But even  if Gollum  could  be trusted on this 
""
"     Then, less willingly  than Bilbo, Frodo  told of all his  dealings with "
thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and sent up two  
brought no answer. At length they pushed and the door yielded. They went in. 
     `Now! '  said Frodo. 'Can  you find  a path easier by day or by  night?  
the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark 
"     Gandalf seemed pleased. `I chose the right way,'  he said.  `At  last we "
"in the South there were great ranges of cloud that still  shone faintly,  in "
"shadows of evening were long in happier lands, they went on again, always on "
     Gandalf passed now into  the wide land  beyond the Rammas Echor. So the 
"Chelsae Butterfield,4199981390806,03-05-1998
"
     He  went to the  window and drew aside the curtains  and the  shutters.  
"when  I return  thither. But  come  now!  Eat and drink,  and  let us  speak "
"     'I'll do that,' said Butterbur. 'But they'll find out he's here without "
"roofed with turves,  and having walls somewhat  bulged. That stage, however, "
"Malissia Wilshire,4017954380689,17-07-1985
"
     'Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. `This is where the stream ran: 
"     'Whatever its name may be,' said Hbma, 'here you shall lay it,  if  you  "
wealth was now too  firmly fixed in the minds  of the  younger generation of  
"     'There may be many a chance ere the night is over,' laughed the  Dwarf.  "
himself crying aloud: O  Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at 
"ground.  ""Go  on,  if  you  must,""  he  said.  ""I'm  just  going  to  lie  here  and  sleep  and "
voice again. Anborn  was  not far behind. He  could creep back and ask him to 
make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!' He  made his end of the rope 
splinters and crack its walls into rubble.' 
"Timotheus Flaunders,4017958564890,30-11-1981
"
"intently.  But Legolas stood beside him, shading  his bright elven-eyes with "
"consider himself, but now he  realized  that he was  weary, weary almost  to  "
"Cob Malkinson,4041375490571568,05-10-1985
"
are right.' 
"Babara D'Ambrosi,4041595841636,08-03-1978
"
"to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to lose!' "
and leafless world. 
"Candi Clitherow,4041375806882,28-12-1977
"
you. At the gate of the forest I must ask you to send back my horse and my ponies. 
"behind. They  stepped out from the  Forest, and found a wide sweep  of grass "
"star  are left to me. I am  naked in  the  dark.  Sam, and there is  no veil "
1. Concerning Hobbits 
turned his arms into  wings and flew away singing into the trees. It  should 
welcome. And though your people have had little fame in the  legends  of the 
"grass beside  the pools,  where  falling streams  halted  in cool hollows on "
what 
"fighting, you've taken the wrong way. Lugb®rz was your road.  The "
"face,  and above the cheek -guards were set the white wings of sea -birds; but "
"Hank Bagg,4064156048599,11-03-1979
"
"Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by "
"rebellion ruthlessly, at its centre in Bywater. But however grim they, might "
"Katlin Mcettrick,4017959118191,11-11-1987
"
""
"Christan Chieco,4041598074144,02-05-1982
"
"     'Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!' said Treebeard. "
gave chase. 
"turned up the Bywater Road,  which ran for  some way sloping up between "
nut he  planted  in the Party Field where the tree had  once  been;  and  he 
face; the golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could 
before  and  cowered  down  in  fright.  Smaug was  still  to  be  reckoned with.  It  does 
northward on the east -bank.' 
Greenwood 
rising of the day. 
people  walk  right  into  them  like  that  without  warning.  It  is  a  fact  that  Bilbo's 
""
"     'And set us a  pretty  riddle,' said  Legolas. 'I  wondered  if you had "
lair.  
made  them  madder  than  ever.  That  would  have  been  the  time  for  Bilbo  to  have 
"him,  under  all  his  limbs  and  his  huge  coiled  tail,  and  about  him  on  all  sides "
them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!' 
"Meredithe Flynn,4041378034037,29-03-1992
"
"Westmarch  that has already been published, under the  title of The  Hobbit. "
"     'I do not  know.  You might  call it far, perhaps.  But what does  tha t "
"Lancelot Varndell,4041371957879,27-03-1976
"
"####-might. There  was a little  corner of  his mind that was still  his own, and "
"which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce  and did not illuminate, "
they had eaten and talked the day before. 
commanding voice.  'Saruman come forth!' 
but  otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch  on the 
"     `Hsh!  ' breathed  Frodo. 'He's getting near now, near enough to hear a  "
"     'Well, let's start then!' He stepped out of the front-door. "
"songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold."" "
"Inna Btham,4017955628110,12-01-1975
"
"the dell itself they  found  recent traces of a fire, and  other  signs of a  "
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled 
could hold the fords for long. 
"Jody Birden,4041377908983,04-03-1979
"
that near the end  its edge was notched and  the  point was broken  off. But 
hastened back. I  thought I heard the thing hiss at me from high above as  I 
"finally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going "
"going away quietly before that, in a small way. That Lotho--' "
"     'The North  Wind blows, but we  shall outfly it,' said Gwaihir. And  he "
"dark, my friend!' "
"came on it, and put their feet out into  emptiness.  Gandalf felt the ground "
rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed  
wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side by side?' 
"had reached the havens before us, and brought their fear with them; and some "
You 
the 
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the 
"Artemus Basilotta,4017952976965850,02-08-2000
"
"####-""I  am  so dreadfully hungry,"" groaned Bilbo, who was  suddenly  aware  that he "
told you before; but if you want to  throw away  what we've come all the way 
"Leena Lanchbury,4041373076421,11-04-1979
"
long. They were  not going  quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning it was 
""
steps on the great rock-the Carrock I believe he calls it. He does not come here 
"laughter  failed, their hands shook  and their limbs were loosed.  The Power  "
could see little but mists over the damp and  deep-cut valley; and beyond it 
"     He heard the  crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul "
"     'Only  what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and "
"a day's easy journey from the feet of the nearest. Dark and drear it looked, though "
enough to last while it was still fresh. Gollum ate nothing. 
they  did  not  turn  their  noses  up  at what  they had got  from  the  trolls'  larder. Their 
"Codi Hubner,4381092572509139,18-02-1975
"
"the care of the Steward of the City, until her brother returns.' "
"     Even  as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing  his death in her  "
hid  his eyes in his hands.  'I  know not who they are; but I thought I  saw 
going.  Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I've been in terror of 
considering them dull  and uncouth. There were probably  many more 
the  Dimrill Stair to the  Silverlode  and to  their own  country.  They had 
"it burst asunder:  there  was  a flash of searing  lightning, and the  doors "
"ere long come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but "
pretend to be polite. 
"only two  days ago. We bring them back now, even as we promised him. Has "
Gandalf  whistled  again;  but  Nori  and  Ori  were  there  almost  before  he  had 
away. 
"Entwives crossed  the Great  River, and made new  gardens,  and  tilled  new "
     They went back to the path that  still  went on along the west side  of 
"cloth was  drawn  close  about him, and in spite of the heat of the room  he "
"winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east. "
"of the Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.' "
     Frodo no longer felt  sleepy and he was willing to talk. But though the 
"of the evergreens-it was pleasant to feel cool grass about their toes again, "
South away! and South away! 
"for  ever, solely. West of the Anduin as  far as the Misty Mountains and the "
"them  as made it.  But you have  to eat some of it every day, and it doesn't  "
"     'My lad,' said Troll, 'this bone I stole. "
`How it  angers  me!   Fool!  Obstinate fool!  Running wilfully to  death and 
"You will hardly believe  it, but poor Bilbo was  really very  taken aback. So far "
"Reagan Alexandre,4041370659732,14-09-1986
"
thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.  
"     'Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders,' said  Jomer; "
of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.  
"Audy Goatman,4041595180159,28-10-1976
"
"     'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well, "
"lights, and  they heard  the voices and  the  laughter quite plainly. They crept slowly "
"though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.' "
"they got it, which at the moment did not seem so impossible); and so they dropped "
"there's you.  If you weren't  hobbits, I  doubt  if  we could house you. But "
"using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out.  Only a few yards ahead dark "
"Then  there was  a  silence. But  that  too  seemed menacing  to Bilbo.  ""If  goblins "
not tell all his  thoughts to Gandalf. What the  wizard  guessed  was always 
     'Of course not.  But never mind.  You can see me on my way.  Tell  Rose 
""
     Chapter 6   Lothlurien  
"history?'  'Saruman is  a  Wizard,' answered Treebeard.  'More  than  that I "
"     After that, first he on  the right, and  then Frodo on the left, passed "
that you will ever return. Is not that so?' 
"and  gentle, might think  her merely wayward, like a child that has not  the "
left last night: I am going to  cut straight across country from here.' 
"Kylie Annear,4041590371449,15-04-1993
"
""
     'What do  you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has happened since 
fell. 'Not alone!' 
     He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune. 
one hand;  but he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Sam 
"Erika Twinbourne,4017959839424,07-10-1997
"
meads in the sunshine  beyond the feet of the forests; and they saw the sloe 
"he  rattled  the  precious  stones  in  his  pockets.  ""Don't  call  my  place  a  nasty  hole! "
Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen. 
     'There  is indeed  a  wide  waste of time  between  the River  and  the 
"open furlongs lay.  There now cowered  the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror "
"     ' ""Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may find  means "
"upon  shelves  and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn  trees. The channel grew "
"     And so it  seemed that they would. The leading  orcs came loping along, "
can tell. Saruman was  reckoned great among them.  I  believe.  He  gave  up 
"with stones, and set about with many spears. "
"you can find a use for it."" "
"reflecting  that  adventures  are  not  all  pony-rides  in  May-sunshine,  when  Balin, "
####-figures of animals; others bore on  their broad backs  trays with bowls and platters 
"to see you; but pain, because now the fear  and doubt  of this evil time are "
     'Then is not Saruman a traitor?' said Gimli. 
"a roofless place, they flung themselves forward, and  then in amazement they "
"Moria . That seems to  end a  chapter. After some  stars another hand begins,  "
arm down as far as ever he could. So Dori actually climbed out of the tree and let 
"already done some evil deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond and Pippin "
"scalps of Men,' said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe. "
"hand with the hilt-shard of his father's sword, and took it for his own.' "
"the  far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a  "
     O proud walls! White towers! O winged crown and throne of gold! 
"Esteban Oldis,4041377279457688,08-01-1986
"
"he escaped and was not found. And then alas! I let the matter rest, watching  "
"the  camp  all  was  now  astir,  as  if  for  battle;  for  the  dwarves  of  Dain  were "
"It was not wide,  but it was too wide to  jump across in the dim light. They "
together towards the ruined gate of the Burg. 
themselves  their own North  tongue. And  we  love them: tall men  and  fair  
"starvation.  This  they  did  all  that  day,  going  very  slowly  and  wearily,  while "
"That idea disturbed the dwarves mightily, and they quickly decided that Bilbo "
"chief characters: Samwise the stouthearted. ""I  want to hear more about Sam, "
"then  Oin  and  Gloin.  They  tugged  and  tugged,  and  suddenly  they  all  fell  over  on "
"Maxie Paeckmeyer,4041379518625729,20-06-1997
"
     But  at the moment Ugl®k was not engaged in  sport. He needed speed and 
"through. O yes, right through. It's the only way.' "
"Koo Wilsey,4041590076977209,13-06-1997
"
"Jessey Ethersey,4818348388518026,26-07-1975
"
""
"of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid,  and cried for  "
"mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass was white as with "
"is that far away, over many hills and  rivers, live  the halfling folk  that "
"mount shot under him? Now, if you'd brought him along, that might have  been "
     AWAKE! AWAKE! 
"     'Of course  we understand,'  said Merry  firmly.  'That is why we  have "
again.' 
"     To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end o f days.'  "
night lasts!' 
"feet. Suddenly into view below came a white  horse, gleaming in the shadows,  "
"     `Very well,' he answered aloud, lowering  his  sword. 'But  still  I am "
"Iolande Knutton,4041374277002,12-07-1981
"
"     'It does,' said Frodo. `Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.' "
"Doubtless  they  perished  first  in  fire,  before  Smaug  came  to  us.""  Then  even  as  he "
"Orazio Goligly,4041595189382,20-06-1980
"
"     ' 'A burden  you have been,'  he answered, 'but not so  now. Light as a  "
"defied his unseen eyes, and the mind of his small enemy; being strengthened, "
questions.  
"forward may remain here, for a while. But whether they stay or go, none  can "
"night-walkers were gone, and the land seemed empty. North amid their "
     `More than meal!  A  feast!'  said  Merry. `As soon as Gandalf reported 
the  king heard what he said. But  ever as he spoke the light shone brighter  
""
Gamgee in a boat. 
"for little is left above  ground, and even the Orcs dare not  delve here for "
""
"out of  the West to  Edoras, and Gandalf brought  tidings of your victory to "
"Ranee Diggens,4041372782219,11-06-1996
"
"Alexis Mangenet,4261332368786342,09-02-1985
"
"themselves,  and all but Hobbits  would find them  exceedingly dull. Hobbits "
"minor and major, but  being fortunately under no obligation either to review "
"one first. What have you lost? Tell me that!"" "
"said  the  wizard.  'You  are  the master of Bag End now. And also, I fancy, "
"of  the living lands,  and began to pass into the desolation that lay before "
"     'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,' said Gimli. "
"pebbles. Here they rested.  It was now  nearly three hours  after noon,  and "
####-but good  Smjagol bears  it. Helps nice master. But  that's no  matter.  The 
That was not what he had set  out to do. 'What am  I to  do then? ' he cried 
company again.' 
""
     We must away! We must away! 
the ground back towards the knoll where the battle had been fought. Suddenly 
perished too. And they were my kindred and my friends. 
looked out. And he beheld with the sight that was given to him all that  had 
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his  side long 
"     Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it, "
"     And far away, as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed it for his own, even "
"in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was  successful, and the Dragon that "
     'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider. 
fluttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in  the light 
"to be  thankful  for, had  they  thought of  it,  though  it  could hardly be  expected  that "
getting into the orc-hold by that gate; he might wait  there for days before 
""
 
little liquor from his silver -studded flask  of leather.  It  was  clear  as 
"little  land,  within  bounds that  he  has set, though none  can  see them, "
 
     fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes. 
"####-place for a while. You shall wait  on me, bear errands,  and talk to me,  if "
""
"hiding-place. He could hear plainly the ringing grate of steel on steel, the "
"they  came marching  back. They  reached the  Gate  of the City and entered,  "
"ahead,' said Elrond. "
"than a day, I guess.' "
the hilt in  Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he  cried. 'It was this accursed  knife 
"Ford Jendricke,4017952114452,08-10-1985
"
than a shelf in the steep faces of the Ephel D®ath; but to  the east it fell 
the  other Orcs  were  both  dispirited  and  rebellious.  They posted a few 
"shadowy  plain over  which there strode  shapes  of Men, tall and grim  with "
"Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and  the foremost horseman "
remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can.  He has the 
"pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and there were junipers and myrtles; "
"trusty lads, somewhere  where there's good  loot nice and handy, and no  big  "
"carried off  to  Rivendell  or anywhere else, leaving  my friends behind  in "
     'Good! Good!'  said  Treebeard. 'But I spoke   hastily. We must  not  be 
after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For ten leagues or more 
"Diandra Marcussen,4041370350894,11-04-1991
"
The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of  grass. There was 
to 
"you mean that your precious Chief has  been hiring ruffians out of the wild, "
"     'Short cuts make  long delays,' argued  Pippin. 'The  country  is rough "
"Bonnee Creany,4041372520062478,01-07-1980
"
parted from him. 
"Wrennie Allanson,4041595891722,12-05-1980
"
     For  a  moment his eyes kindled. 'Go!'  he said. 'I did   not spend long 
"####-Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind him a halfling warrior, small "
"westward. They have taken the guise of riders in black."" "
also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky. I think we ought to move 
since the world began. Hunger. The roads are cut. Rohan will not come.' 
"Shea Thow,4017953142429,08-06-1988
"
mail-clad knight with a bow of string and green  willow! If  the  Dark  Lord 
"     'I have heard many  tales  in Gondor and elsewhere,' said Aragorn, 'but "
"'Gandalf was our guide, and he led us  through  Moria; and when  our  escape "
"     'I dunno,' said Sam. 'After sundown, I  reckon. And he's gone off. Says "
"trees hewn down wantonly  and  left to die, with evil runes or the fell sign "
"to  your  own  woods  from  this  cold  cheerless  place,""  he  answered  shivering,  ""you "
"Kania Hargey,4017956412634590,06-10-1985
"
"same, if you had been going the other way. Do  not risk getting entangled in "
"fires, for they  were  uncertain  of events; but they set a ring of  mounted "
"my guard are  in the inner court.  When  dawn comes, I  will bid  men  sound "
heart.  for  he was a healer. and his care was lightened; and certain it was 
"come down,' he said. 'I must stay beside my son. He might still speak before "
     The king with his guard and Merry at his side passed down from the gate 
outside heard the greedy roaring of  the fire within. And then Denethor gave 
duties.' 
"     Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.  "
"over  his  fire,   shielding it and  building  it up with heavier  wood, when "
"Cicily Brand-Hardy,4041597107543397,02-09-1985
"
"     Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this  land "
"glades about him. Then  he noticed a thin spiral of blue-grey,  smoke, plain "
from  a  storm  in what  seemed  a  convenient  cave  and  unused;  nothing was  further 
"the  last  few  days,  that  came  down  from  the  hills  and mountains  in  front  of  them. "
     After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at  once. `We 
last met on the first  of May: at  Sam  Ford down the Brandywine. He told me 
"will help me.  For  I know what I should do, but I  am  afraid of doing  it, "
"confused and a bit shaky inside, but so far still lookishly determined to go on with "
"only one storey,  but it  had the  same narrow windows, and it was built  of "
"     'Precious,  precious,  precious!'  Gollum  cried. 'My  Precious!  O  my "
"Kalli Cudd,4459280463706768,12-03-1998
"
"altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.' "
"feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.' "
"even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful still. But for long now "
"stricken with it fell slowly into an ever deeper  dream, and  then passed to "
"Caria Macguire,4017953168509829,24-10-1977
"
peering about him not far from where Bilbo sat. 
Moon to do with us? ' 
"     'It  was  the  Huorns,  or so the Ents call them  in ""short  language"". "
"     Faramir  smiled, though his heart was  filled with  pity.  'Your window "
     with the silver Sunday spoon. 
"a yell  ran off  down the lane. Before Frodo could recover or  speak a word, "
"     It was after nightfall when, wet and tired, the travellers came at last  "
"and  a  third that ran towards him. As  it bent sharply round  the tower, it "
####-clawed towards his neck. 
"friends,"" said he. ""I have not brought  you hither  to be instructed by you, "
"on the ground as if  he had been stunned. They  roused him  with difficulty, "
"Beorn,  if  less  in  size  and  strength.  In  their  day  the  last  goblins were  hunted  from "
"     ' ""Hear  now the words of the Heir of Isildur!  Your oath is fulfilled. "
"####-     'You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,' said  Sam anxiously. 'You get down "
misleading path and strike northward; for although they had not been able to 
""
"Smjagol  and  fetch me the herbs, and I'll think better of you. What's more, "
doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.' 
"have to put up with his ways. If he's false, he's false.' "
"branches. The  beeches were  their  favourite  trees. The  king's  cave  was his palace, "
"     'But where else will you direct me? ' said Frodo. 'You cannot yourself,  "
"stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale "
"""Well,  thief!  I  smell  you  and  I  feel  your  air.  I  hear  your  breath. Come  along! "
to return to your war or to your king.' 
"held up a  small shirt of  mail. It was close-woven of many  rings, as supple "
"narrow creek that  barred their way. It was green and stagnant,  thrust  out "
shining weight into a deep realm of sleep. 
"jerk, staggering  as if from a blow  upon his  breast and head. Then greatly "
He blanched and cowered against the wall. 
"the courage of Bard and his last mighty shot. ""If only he had not been killed,"" they "
"come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.' "
"down for a minute and collect my wits, and have a drink."" He had only just had a "
errand-riders of  Gondor reckoned to  make their greatest speed. We may ride 
that gave the errand to him.' 
"dwarves that could not give any good account of themselves, sneaking through the "
heavy-hearted. 
####-sudden fear of that silence: 
"     Gamling the Old looked down  from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice "
"eyes.  Knobbed  and pitted  with corruption  was her  age-old hide, but ever  "
"     `And yet less  thanks  have  we than you. Travellers  scowl at  us, and "
the song was only too plain; for now the goblins took out whips and whipped them 
gale. The out-companies with a great cheer turned and smote their  pursuers.  
"give it back to little Smjagol. Yes, yes, master: give  it back, eh? Smjagol "
"     'Yet  there  are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,' said Gamling. 'I  "
"If Gollum had contrived  to follow  them,  he  remained  unseen and unheard. "
"fallen the rest fled shrieking. leaving the  defenders unharmed, except  for  "
the breach.  The dark tide flowed  up to  the  walls  from  cliff  to cliff. 
"in this place.' `But there's no time to look for them,' said Sam. "
came back. 
"saw Gandalf, he checked his  pace and  whinnied loudly; then trotting gently  "
     Where many paths and errands meet. 
beyond that was a light on the hem of the sky that spoke of the Sea. 
"hair and beard were white, but strands of black still showed about his  lips "
the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water before 
"perplexed,  they began  to grumble at  the hobbit, blaming him  for what had at  first "
"Bronnie Hennington,4041376569921981,30-11-1983
"
"there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as  they looked, "
that  we have endured of  late has seemed  so grievous  as  the  treason  of 
"Barliman, if that means anything to you.' "
"Give him a horse and  let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice "
"     Nonetheless he drew near,  and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held "
knock at  their gate  and ask if we're on the right road  for Mordor? Or are 
forget-me-nots.  About  her  feel  in  wide   vessels  of  green  and  brown 
     So it was that in the  light of a fair morning King Thjoden and Gandalf 
"weapons,  who  return  at  last  to  our  own  as  spoken  of  old.  Nor  could  we  fight "
"obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice  or to cast yourself into the "
"""It was  a  sharp  struggle, but worth  it,""  said one.  ""What nasty  thick  skins  they "
pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one!' 
was all ruined.' 
"Halette Harbage,4041596638052324,16-01-1992
"
"     'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all "
mist  was about them. The ends of their long  sweeping boughs hung down like 
"set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over him.' "
"by way of the  Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became  really anxious, "
     'With that the wretch  floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly 
"Wileen Rampling,4041590023158911,16-09-1985
"
"sized  trolls  at  hand  in  a  nasty  mood,  quite  likely  to  try  toasted  dwarf,  or  even "
craft? Speak now and be swift!' 
"     'That is the  road  to the  vales of  Tumladen and  Lossarnach, and the "
The stars are far brighter 
for Helm's Deep. 
"     'Very  likely  he can't guess himself,' said Frodo. `And I don't  think  "
"what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But "
"not to them. `Leave me alone, gollum! You hurt me.  O my poor hands, gollum! "
"of the 'ent-strides' but had failed, getting lost at about three thousand -- "
"""And  next  year  after  that,""  said  Dwalin,  ""and  our  beards  will  grow  till  they "
and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you so far at 
"Eliot Brookbank,4041378203541,18-03-1976
"
the ride of the Grey Company from the North?' 
'Really  old Butterbur has  made  a mess of things!' he  said. 'He  deserves 
come to  Minas Tirith and  not to go  east. I grew angry and he  left me. He 
     They were led then to seats beside Faramir: barrels  covered with pelts 
"blazed in  a vast crescent, at the nearest point less than a league distant. "
"Zara Toppin,4017954878990085,03-09-1975
"
"     'Well,  Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'I'm in a bit of  a fix.  Rose  and me had "
"trailed away  eastward, great rolling clouds  floated  down  its  sides  and "
bears  dancing  slow  heavy  dances  round  and  round  in  the  moonlight  in  the 
     'What has become of the miserable Orcs?' said Legolas.  
"     `About a couple of hours after daybreak,' said  Sam, `and  nigh on half "
"     'If you mean, inventing all that about a ""present"",  well, I thought the "
read them. We might do  better  in the sunlight.  Wait! Here is something: a  
"opened  his eyes, and they were clear, and he spoke in a quiet voice  though  "
"Lexie Mayers,4017959997487,18-01-1991
"
waggon-trains of goods  and booty and fresh  slaves. Here  in  the northward 
"he laved her brow with it, and her right arm lying cold and nerveless on the "
"ears  spread out, long  snout upraised like a huge serpent  about to strike. "
"all that.  Get Sam to help, and when you've knocked things into  shape, come "
"Carlynn Oxenham,4041373919732499,11-09-1994
"
"many orc-holds  that  clustered about  the dale of  Udyn.  A  road,  already "
"""Very  kind  of  you,""  said  Bilbo.  ""But  really  it  is  a  relief  to me. How  on  earth "
"     The others  waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragor n "
"     And some without order, for none could he found to command them  in the "
"the rest, one great grey wall. `When we left the pass I  led you southwards,  "
     'And  that  message  brought  me  hope.  For Saruman the  White is  the 
"Eloisa Lidington,4017959282898,29-01-1982
"
"suspiciously  at Strider. 'But if I  was in your plight,  I wouldn't take up "
hill something small and dark  against  the  glimmer of the moonrise. It was 
"""What's the matter?"" Bilbo called. ""What have you lost?"" "
"took them, and they fled,  and died, and the hoofs of  wrath rode over them. "
"The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies,  "
     Chapter 1   The Taming of Smjagol   
"like that,  suddenly, off  his guard after  a  fall. Before Sam  could get a  "
"runner over  firm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the toiling men,  "
"what you offer. For many long  years I  had pondered what I might do, should "
"breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a  "
from the East. 
this  before. Almost you make  me regret that  I  have not seen these caves.  
and  went down into the lowlands of  the Yale  making for Stock;  but a lane 
"trees, or they would have been seen. If we find nothing between here and the "
"spoke in a clear cold voice.  'The wise speak only  of what they know, Grnma "
"They had little wood for firing, and none would have dared to take an axe to "
"Ivonne Rous,4041372570412771,07-10-1999
"
"were you the blissful Queen of Gondor, still I would love you. Jowyn, do you "
"beech; oak from fir. There were a few older Ents,  bearded and gnarled  like "
     'Don't let him go! Kill him! He's a villain and a murderer. Kill him!' 
And sorrow fail and sadness 
"Lennie Olivetta,4041594730640,16-04-1977
"
fingering their knives. I'll never forget their claws and eyes.' 
"     'What is the matter with my  master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking "
"them a  wide  prospect,  for the most pan of  lands empty  and  featureless,  "
"Jazmin Kingstne,4041372725614,10-10-1985
"
"     'But Gandalf was not,' said Legolas.  "
     The  Company now went down  the road from the Gates.  It was  rough and 
little  fellow  bobbing  on  the  mat  it  almost  made  him  really  fierce.  Many  a  time 
"     'Thjoden King,' they answered. 'He is dead. But Jomer King now rides in  "
"Junette Apps,4041599922024090,23-07-1978
"
     'Do  you  really  mean that  Strider is one  of the people of  the  old 
new horizon. 
"     'Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some "
"####-     The  light grew no stronger,  for  Orodruin was still belching forth  a  "
"belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.  "
     But the engines did not waste shot upon the indomitable wall. It was no 
already guessed it. But I  learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of 
maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!' 
"world  was  far  away,  and  the  mountains  were  falling  back  behind  them  into  the "
"really  had  found  one,  by  accident.  Still  there  it was: Gollum with  his  bright  eyes "
"his errand  returned  to  his memory,  and  he  ran forward.  At that moment "
must harden their hearts to leave this land.  Those who no longer wish to go  
"     Treebeard  rumbled for a moment, as if he  were pronouncing some  deep, "
he saw  that  it would have been no good even  if he had managed  to get astride his 
"Ola Hampshire,4041376383451,30-01-1990
"
his hope has failed. Here I stay.' 
"each ridge was steep  and difficult, but  the  eastward slopes were gentler, "
"but  too  late:  his  hands  snapped  on  thin  air,  and  Bilbo,  falling  fair  on  his  sturdy "
"     And last of  all Aragorn greeted Jomer of Rohan, and they embraced, and  "
"her compliments.'  He handed  it down and moved off, followed by a chorus of "
""
"Evered Treske,4041375051857976,25-09-1979
"
rippling down. There on the  hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair 
"Rhona Cronk,4041590049055216,03-04-2001
"
"a fleeting moment,  could one of the sleepers have seen him, they would have "
stopped. 'Nar!' it snarled. 'I'm going  home.' It  pointed across the valley 
"""Yes,  lots,""  said  Bilbo,  before  he  remembered  not  to  give  his  friends  away. "
     'There!' said  Merry.  'That  must be the stone  that marked  the place 
"     'Like that friend of Bill Ferny's at Bree,' said Sam. "
You will have neither. But that is not my doing. I merely foretell.' 
those folk. And he spoke right.' 
"     'The morning is wearing away,' he said. 'Soon we must go.' "
"####-naked sides, dull red as if stained with blood. "
wind  off the hill-top. Good  night!'  She passed  out  of  the room  with a  
"     Gluin  rose and bowed, and Legolas  continued.  'In  the days  of  fair "
something dark shooting under the shadow of the bank. I couldn't see no more 
"is,  if  you  follow me.  And Mr. Drogo was  staying at Brandy Hall with his "
noted  how his master's left hand would often be raised  as if to ward  on a  
barrels as soon as they were all afloat below.  
Out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire 
"remain, though none be left  in Gondor to sing of it in the days that are to "
"Brego, passed the  Door  and was  never seen among men again. A rash  vow "
"Tye Antoniades,4383217971823371,11-09-1982
"
ready beside each bed. 
"her again, dearer than daughter.' "
"rock or  thicket by the  way, yet  ever as they went  forward  they felt the "
"would  happen,  you  see.  Perhaps  that  war  part  of  his  reason  for  going  off  and "
"not be from the knot. He examined it  and found that  it was not too  tight, "
up the bank. At once it sat down and began to gnaw at the small silver thing  
"view to  the  west,  as  the  little  boats  went   rustling by  along  their "
"lift up your hearts.' He was silent for some  time, and then he began not to "
would  not be  worth while to leave his master for  that. It would not bring 
the North Moors.' 
"     `Alas! yes,' said Elrond. `Isildur took it, as should not have been. It "
was removed from them; and now looking in the eyes of their enemies they 
"     'But I do not desire healing,' she said. 'I wish to ride to war like my "
""
"snapped and  rattled on his  scales and  jewels, and  their  shafts  fell back kindled by "
the southern half of the Forest faded from view.  
"     He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed out into "
"     Upon the west of  Mordor marched the gloomy range  of  Ephel D®ath, the "
"shape of shadow,  impenetrable,  lightning-crowned,  filling  all  the  sky. "
"     'Despair, or folly?' said Gandalf.  `It is not  despair, for despair is "
"####-     'All is well,' said Aragorn, turning back. 'Here are some of my own kin "
Roast Mutton 
"breathing  space. Better  still,  they heard  that  three of  their ponies had escaped and "
"Kailey Josefsen,4041375439877597,26-03-1979
"
River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there  are other perils. Boats may 
"is  a strange  friendship!' 'Strange it  may seem,' said Legolas; 'but while "
"Abbey Spurrior,4041599453446,15-05-1975
"
well-knit in frame. 
certainly Sam's:  it was rather large and heavy.  This  then  is the answe r: 
"""Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more here now – Fili and Kili, I believe,"" "
had  not  had  a meal  since  the  night  before  the  night  before  last.  Just  think  of  that 
"course, he  also  firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the "
"""Your grandfather Thror was killed, you  remember,  in  the mines of Moria by "
for news of a party of hobbits. Could  it have been Gandalf? He  might  have 
"     'Well now,  what  about a  smoke,  while  you tell  us  what  has  been "
"Elfie Bendon,4017958042855,08-05-1983
"
"     'I suppose we haven't  got an  axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked "
"Merle Anthes,4017955044576237,30-08-1991
"
"'But you  shall be merry tonight,  and listen to your  heart's content. Come "
"gloomy  thoughts,  although  when  they  had  said  good-bye  to  Elrond  in  the  high "
"Dora Waywell,4041591755679298,20-09-1996
"
"hand,  and when  he  tried  to move  he  found  that  his  legs were  already wrapped  in "
"curious,  you know, after all I've heard. I  should very much like  just  to "
"Jeannie Mastrantone,4529269857797,02-07-1980
"
"     And  Aragorn said to Halbarad: 'What is  that that  you bear, kinsman?' "
"enemies, if  there were any within that could hold weapons;  unless some foe "
"were  too  grumpy  to  talk.  ""And  I'm  sure  the  rain  has  got  into  the  dry  clothes  and "
"rumbling in  the distance now.  The lightning flickered still, far off among "
"     A new road or a secret gate, "
"Guardians, and of  the labours of those that made possible the long peace of "
"     'Whatever happens to  the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s  get  their "
"fire upon the steps of Orthanc. his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise, "
"on,  until at last they  were  clinging with  desperate fingers to the steps "
pasture.  Just  now  he  was  enjoying  the  sport  of  town-baiting  more  than  he  had 
"     'You may  have  a chance later,' said Gandalf. `But we cannot  make any "
the town the heralds crying and the  war -horns  blowing. For the king was to 
grew on them and trailed along the ground. 
"to  silence, Frodo slowly  raised his head.  Across the  narrow  valley, now "
carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came  to  
"the Necromancer,  the  Ring.  The  discovery  of the significance  of  these "
"     'Then let us be swift,' said Jomer. 'Let us drive through such foes  as "
"     'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,' said Erestor, "
""
"and I've lived a  very  long, long time; so my  name is like  a story.  Real "
peck. 
had  whisked  the  trays  and  a  couple  of  small  tables  into  the  parlour  and  set  out 
"     There being nothing  else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to "
change.  'Dotard!  What is  the house of  Eorl but  a  thatched  barn  where 
"Zaccaria Cossom,4041376835135887,11-09-1992
"
"haze. There was  a beaten way,  north-westward  along the foot-hills  of the "
glance!' 
bestowed her?' 
"     'But why should  he leave  us behind, and without  a word?' said Gimli. "
"doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool. Don't disturb it! ' "
takes another shape and grows again.' 
Saruman turned.  'No evil?'  he  cackled. 'Oh no! Even when he sneaks out at 
     'Behold the King!' 
     `Come! ' said Aragorn. `We will  venture one more journey  by night. We 
""
"     Frodo sat for a moment looking at  the fire,  but  his only thought was "
cellars. 
"they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought, though, when I "
"Wake Leyson,4080838250077185,25-02-1988
"
"Krisha Phillcock,4041377244701681,12-09-2001
"
his shining mail. For he and his knights still held themselves like lords in 
and high enough above the  benches of the Men  for their convenience. Before 
like a turret-stair. 
     And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls. 
"become hazy and deceptive, but there could  be no doubt that  the Downs were "
the smell of the air! I used to spend a week just breathing.' 
Even  magic  rings  are  not  much  use  against  wolves-especially  against  the  evil 
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I 
"heart!'  He  clutched at his  breast. 'No! No!'  he said,  opening his eyes.  "
"would still have done just so, I deem.  I k now you well. Ever your desire is "
and fear they stood and found no words to say. 
"Dike a huge pit had  been delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled "
"house  at Edoras over the  plains, a ride  of  some days. But we have  taken "
"asked. 'Or indeed with wit to  understand me? Not thou at least!' he mocked, "
     In  the afternoon  they went  on  down  the  woods. They were  probably 
"is like  to  this land itself; rich and rolling in part,  and else  hard and "
"these days, very disturbed. But cheer up,  Barliman!  You  have been  on the "
a bit of luck while you were away. Indeed they did not take everything. I've 
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from 
command of Denethor or his  chief  captains. But  now all the horses and the  
in their helplessness  --  little squeaking ghosts that  wandered among  the 
"     Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It was early night, "
     'I  thought that I saw  a white figure that shone and did not  grow dim 
"the  light  at  the  gate  was  like  a  little  bright  hole  far  behind,  and  the  quiet  was  so "
     Altogether 1420 in  the Shire was a marvellous year. Not only was there 
me?' 
"Abe McKelloch,4041596405183,30-03-1975
"
"Forest Belvin,4041596112729868,15-12-2001
"
company breathed once more. 
     And I thought he were lyin' in graveyard.' 
rightful king be known .' 
even where he guessed the outlet must actually be. 
"cloud-wall, and beyond that again a yet deeper gloom. But  even as he looked "
"was  still fresh  then. Through Mirkwood and back again it  led them, though "
"     While Strider was  gone, Frodo gave Merry a  rapid account of all  that "
he has to give.' 
strove to hold his outpost. Would that I could have been here sooner!' 
"     'Yes  it's  always  dark here,' said  Sam. `But Gollum's come  back Mr. "
like a pair of pincers.  
""
"asks, O yes. But when we gets closer, we'll  see perhaps we'll  see then. It "
camp;  and  there  they  laid  down  their weapons  and  held  up  their  hands  in  sign  of 
hooves quickly falter and then go still. 
soon  'dying' all men were saying upon  the walls and in the streets. And by 
enjoyed anything for years. But there was still a company of archers that held their 
living unbeknown to them that have sneaked in from outside to lie up in the dark. 
"Wendel Weld,4748885912295,11-09-1985
"
"     'Then  tell  us what  you will, and  time allows!'  said  Gimli. 'Come, "
Merry and  had a seat set for him at his side. 'It is not  as I  would  have 
"king's  eye, I  am told, though he  has  given  him  to  Mithrandir  for his "
and  after  a while  they  all  fell  silent  again. All  except Balin. Long  after  the others 
knives were made of metal at all. 
"     `Stop  chattering!' cried  Frodo,  now  recovered  enough to feel  both "
journey tomorrow.' 
become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels;  and he does not care for  
"have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up "
talking  lightly in  hobbit-fashion of the things  that  had happened  since 
"Garrott le Keux,4017957370977039,02-10-1976
"
others  would  not  have  dared  to  find  fault  with  him;  but  indeed  most  of  them 
"mounds covered them, and the stone  doors were shut; and the grass grew over  "
"its  colour,  how perfect was  its  roundness. It was an admirable thing and "
of that ere we came?' 
"Wood. I  scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and  I did not wish to turn "
"home.  Off  they  trotted  gaily,  seeming  very  glad  to  put  their  tails  towards  the "
doors  and barring the  way. His sword  was now  in  his  hand and the point  
"     'Go to  sleep!'  said Merry. 'You'll  get information enough, sooner or "
hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and scimitars which  shone  red  as 
mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell!' 
"lands, for the  morning  was come; and they saw the towers  of the  City far "
could spare them. And sometimes as  a man may cast a dainty to  his cat (his  
     'But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others I 
"     'lndeed,' said Gluin,  `if it were not for  the  Beornings, the passage "
""
""
"the water-gate being hauled up, and he found that he was in the midst of a bobbing "
all  his.  thoughts  and  energies  had  been  concentrated  on  getting  to  the  Mountain 
"the mantelpiece. Well,  no! Here it is in  my  pocket!' He hesitated.  'Isn't "
"wisdom, and of  power -- for many wonderful things he  did among us  -- could "
"hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lo  "
"     ' ""Saruman the White,""  answered Radagast. ""And  he told me to say that "
"     ` ""Then I must have a steed on land,"" I said, ""and a steed surpassi ngly "
"Florry Iddison,4017957529910,17-10-1976
"
time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has taken on the burden. If 
"right,' he  thought, 'and then  he  may  not.  Fair  speech may hide  a foul "
"sprang  to their  feet,  putting  back to back and whipping out  their small "
"end.""  And they fled  before  the  wrath of  Isildur, and did not dare to go "
very  much like  to see  Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed 
did not dare to wander far. The moon had set and the night was very dark. 
"Man  Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed  more  "
"left the Brandybucks  and  gone  off  to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you  "
"     Gluin began then  to talk  of the works of  his  people,  telling Frodo "
"fright:  ""please  be  careful!""  and  ""please,  don't  trouble!  I  can  manage.""  But  the "
"Now  Gandalf  led  the  way.  ""We  must  not  miss  the  road,  or  we  shall  be  done "
"####-grew.  But  if  there  are  mallorn-trees beyond  the Great Sea,  none  have "
Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They have all gone 
"looking long  and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits saw  that they "
"and up trees! What do you think I am? A porter?"" "
"     'No,  I  don't  think any  harm  of old Butterbur.  Only  he  does  not "
ambassadors to use less insolence. But  no one  has threatened you. You have 
for the  clear song of an Elven-lord. He murmured  old childish tunes out of 
"Robinet Dieton,4017956803111521,17-04-1981
"
under  trees and  growing plants; he tunnelled  into green  mounds;  and  he 
"saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.' "
"     'Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'We must take it and "
"erred or no, of this I am sure: he died well, achieving some good thing. His "
he would do as Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.  
"hundred  yards  through  the  air  and  went  down  a  rabbit  hole,  and  in  this  way  the "
passed into Winter. 
City 
"circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot.  "
"####-as  a  protection  against  enemies  of  all  sorts,  and  especially  against  the  dragon  of "
"     But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of  the evil that "
sky above me.  I wakened Goldberry singing under  window;  but  nought 
"prisoners to the Great Shelf,"" he cried and was off again. The other seized Dori in "
"Timmy Eplett,4017952395085918,30-11-1978
"
"     Frodo himself, after the first shock, found  that being his  own master  "
and 
"Arod was  tame and willing  beneath  him, moving  here and there  with but a "
a  full account of their journey from the time  when they left Hobbiton. Sam 
"not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help  now! Go after "
danced. 
"and when it had  passed, the Isen flowed and bubbled in its bed again, as it "
"Tillie Knowlys,4017955576574,07-04-1993
"
"and a half between yer, since we come down from the mountains. How much more "
"     'It  reminds me of N®menor,' said Faramir, and wondered to hear himself "
"     In  the  next day  or two, as they went on, borne  steadily southwards, "
"their  heads. From that  point  there  was a sheer  drop, for  the cliff was "
"deepening in the woods, when  they went on again.  Their paths now went into "
feeling a strange expectancy: something was  approaching that  held a hidden 
     'And now the horn of the elder  son lies in two pieces upon the lap  of 
again.  But  that  was  not  the  last  of  the  lights  in  the  forest.  Later  when  the  night 
"Smaug  and  Esgaroth,  but  not  of  Bard.  The waxing moon  rose  higher  and  higher "
waterfall. 
"####-through  the  camp  an  old  man  wrapped  in  a  dark  cloak,  rose  from  a  tent  door "
"from Mirkwood,  just before the Battle of Five  Armies, that Bilbo found his "
"still, unread, I  guess,  by  any save Saruman  and  myself since the  kings "
"her present wisdom. Not feared, save  as men may fear the  dignity of a man, "
""
     In Lurien the fair. 
"them  because  of  his  shadow  (altogether  thin  and wobbly  as  it was  in  torch-light), "
"     And with  that  he stopped, brought up  hard, as if he had hit his head "
"""Yellow it was,"" said William. "
"     'None is  rich  and fair  enough for him,' said Pippin.  'He will  have "
"mountains, until presently it plunged  into the great ring of trees.  "
"But I begin to  wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever  "
"Vale Bearsmore,4644353875592906,08-06-1989
"
"     'No, you do not understand,' said Gimli. 'No dwarf could be  unmoved by "
####-than if he were carrying a hobbit-child pig-a -back in some romp on the lawns 
     Then Aragorn sang again: 
 
chasm with one curving  spring  of fifty feet. It was  an ancient defence of 
"that his padding feet had  taken him  at last to Esgaroth, and even  to  the "
"was mist on the River, and white fog  swathed the shore; the far  bank could "
"     `Coming, Mr. Frodo!  Coming! ' called  Sam, and flung himself  from the "
climbing warily up they  came to the road at the  point  where it swung east  
Outside.' 
"ahead, a hissing murmur. "
"     The trees were the worst loss and damage, for at Sharkey's bidding they "
"pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood "
"     'My Nibs  is  with them. But you  can  go and help him,  if you  have a  "
the edge  of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump; then they sprang 
"left in the City.  Now they  sprang forward, formed, quickened to  a gallop, "
quickly as their chilled fingers would work. 
"and tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding valley "
"####-shocking  cold.  For  three  days  he  sneezed  and  coughed,  and  he  could  not  go  out, "
"     Farmer Cotton looked at him slowly. 'I was just going to ask you that,' "
"Leisha O'Shiel,4041372776359859,03-07-1988
"
"Chev Silwood,4041370405974858,13-12-1993
"
open eyes. I must blindfold you.' 
"Ardelle Tolussi,4017956132203346,15-11-1989
"
"there was a barrel of good drink at hand, and  they were drinking out of  jugs. But "
"Garrard Horry,4935248040712942,22-07-1983
"
""
broke out anew. 
"if  your Quest did  not concern us  closely, you should  have refuge in this "
inadvertently remained behind. 
"unmasked:  it  was  stern  and commanding, and  a keen  wit lay  behind  his "
"So they sang, or very like that, only there was a great deal more of it, and there "
"Cannot be heard, cannot be smelt. "
"almost, only they seemed bigger, and kept dipping in and out of the water. "
"####-and they saw a figure standing at the  rail, looking  down upon them: an old "
flows at last to the sea that washes the  walls of Dol Amroth. You  will not 
"must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost spent, and it will  be "
when cries and  hornblasts were heard  from their scouts that went in front. 
"Outsiders of any kind, great or small, did not make themselves a nuisance. "
"     The hobbits  were taken to a corner and given a  low bed to lie on,  if "
"road, they met a stout barrier of old farm-carts upturned. That halted them. "
""
looks  towards our  friends of Rohan.  Do  you know aught of them? Will they 
"possible course for them to  take,  they climbed down  the bank, and turning "
looked  with delight upon  the many  fair faces that were gathered together; 
more the fear that had fallen on them  when  the winged shape swept over the 
""
that. 
 
"Orcs gained the  summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them "
"     Meanwhile the  labour  of  repair went on apace, and   Sam was kept very "
"without  hope  of  further  help. They were  at  the  end  of  their  journey,  but  as  far  as "
Captain's seat in the middle of the inmost table. 
about  the  green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden  flowers 
"Valera Carlet,4867355581890912,23-12-1980
"
"Sunny Meddows,4041372010210058,06-07-1985
"
 
"as  possible from the hole in  the floor, he crept  to the  edge  and peered "
wailing cry. 
"     So time unreckoned passed, until Gimli  saw a  sight that he  was  ever "
"     'Oh, they're both cracked,' said Ted. 'Leastways old Bilbo was cracked, "
####-Their  great  roots spread  from the  wall to the  water. Under the   looming 
Before today is over we ought to find the Great  Gates and see the waters of 
of them since then.' 
that they would not go further that day. 
"Cora Hatliff,4041591087994,09-12-1975
"
hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down  my back. But  I did 
"Madlin Hullyer,4017956487857399,05-06-1989
"
"them, for  the ground became harder  and the grass  shorter. Far away to the "
"name?"" "
"as Sam  sprang at  him, using the heavy bundle as both shield and weapon, he "
"     'That,'  said Merry, pointing  with his hand, 'that  is the line of the "
""
"the water  seemed  cold  and cruel: the voice  of Morgulduin,  the  polluted "
your skulking king!' 
we ceded to them the fields of Calenardhon  that are since called Rohan; for  
"round here well enough, but he knows he is not a  match for me in a wood. It "
"as he stood and stared wildly round,  did it seem that, though now awake, he "
big  black  chair  of  the  same  sort  (in which  he  sat with his great  legs  stuck  far out 
things that he would never have found out by himself; but he never repaid me 
"citadel upon the north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the  hill "
"unexpected valleys, narrow with deep sides, that opened suddenly at their feet, and "
afterwards called. The fallen hobbits were  laid together in a grave on  the 
     'What about Mrs.  Cotton and Rosie?' said Sam. 'It  isn't safe  yet for  
"compounded  strong  elixirs, or  in high cold  towers asked questions of the "
They looked about for a hiding-place where they could shelter from evil eyes 
"     of adamant his helmet tall, "
     Boromir held out  long  against this choice;  but  when it became plain 
""
all the woods.  
"to  the  Cleft from the  far side, from  some entry to  the tower,  perhaps.  "
"dark smithies  of Mordor, and  its hideous head, founded of black steel, was "
"     All that is gold does not glitter, "
wind: 
held up an ancient  crown. It was shaped like the helms of the Guards of the 
forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor's feet. 
held a bowl before Faramir's dreaming face. 
"Jedidiah Blakes,4451327840386,05-05-1999
"
"when they met;  but it was  not, and  the hobbit held  in his hand an Elvish "
     'I  hope  that the  forgotten people  will  not have  forgotten how  to 
     They did not  halt  until  they were  out  of bowshot from  the  walls.  
"the Ring tempted him, gnawing at his will and  reason.  Wild fantasies arose "
"""Don't interrupt!"" said Gandalf. ""You will get there in a few days now, if we're "
"brought it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace! Yet you  "
""
but the ways in which a story-germ uses the soil of experience are extremely  
In  that  last  hour  Beorn  himself  had  appeared  –  no  one  knew  how  or  from 
"Sigismondo Ferdinand,4017957090764,04-02-1982
"
"at hand,  made  itself  felt  as  a great  brooding presence, full  of secret "
badly. Strange are the turns of fortune!  Often does  hatred hurt  itself! I 
"     Frodo shut and locked the  round door, and  gave the key  to Sam.  'Run "
     At this  a  chorus of voices broke  out. If Frodo had  really wanted to 
The  Water  on  business  of  his  own  since  they  were  all  small  hobbit-boys  and 
"     Hill and water under sky, "
"of silver fume,  beneath which rolled the cool night-waters of the Anduin. A "
     He breathed with relief when he was safely across. `Live and  learn! as 
filled with a wealth that could not be guessed. To say that Bilbo's breath was taken 
"'My friends,' he  said, 'and all you people of this city and of the  Western "
     from east to west he passed away. 
full account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!' 
"Marleen Benardette,4041372921061491,02-04-1990
"
treachery  of  that  miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us  remember  
"with this tale, or it will be supper-time before it is ended."" "
Faramir. `Then maybe you can see it in your mind's eye: a great horn  of the  
"Giles Cozby,4041373470400,25-01-1993
"
"     'Now down we  go, Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'Down into  the  valley quick , "
"misery,  with hope  growing ever fainter behind.  They  ran, and  they  ran, "
"Vasili Hilldrop,4912584949707,29-07-1983
"
"elbows, covering the back of his head with his large flat hands.  "
resistance  thicker  than  the  foul air. As they  thrust forward they  felt 
"him. By day  his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade, "
"land. And yet, Pippin, I  feel from afar his haste and  fear.  He  has begun "
     'Farewell then  for a while!' said Aragorn.  'I must go  to  others who 
"Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!' "
"the foaming waves between  us, and mist  covers the jewels of Calacirya  for  "
"will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.' "
"blocked  from  closing  with  a  stone,  but  up  the  long  tunnel  came  the  dreadful "
"####-him. He went some paces back into the darkness,  not daring to move far,  or  "
"     The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the span, "
coastlands before all is lost. That is the Paths of the Dead.' 
"pulled open the door with a jerk, and they all fell in, one on top of the other. More "
Haradrim came only a tale from far off: a rumour of  the wrath and terror of 
"himself. 'You see, I am getting so  sleepy,' he said. 'And when I have  time "
hear.' 
"####-answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor, "
"     Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain "
"     'And what of Cair Andros?' said the Prince. 'That, too, must  be  held, "
"to your chiefs as quick as may be. I have only an hour or two to spare."" "
"folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause ' said Gimli. 'My "
"steward a king, if the king  returns not? "" he asked. ""Few years, maybe,  in "
returned with clenched fists and the light of battle in his eye. 
"Wendi Ivanishchev,4041373158070,11-05-1991
"
""
"part? Where  is this prisoner?  Let him be brought forth and yielded to  us,  "
     That in his arms lay glistening. 
"Ewell Sturley,4041373241629,24-07-1981
"
"Rustin Brick,4041370219990975,21-03-1987
"
before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see  the grey forms of two  
"spent in presents, both useful and extravagant – which to a certain extent accounts "
"impression,  ""I  did  the  best  I  could.  There  we  were  with  the  wolves  going  mad "
"and there was Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of "
would not be parted from thee  - because they love thee.' Then she turned and 
"him more sorrow than joy, and he was now weary of his adventure. He was aching "
"lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!' "
became  even aware of  them.  And the world being after all  full of strange 
"Isen into Langstrand and  Lebennin,  and so come to Gondor from the  regions "
of  the goods and packs were  stowed. The boats were moved and  steered with 
Isen and crossed  them. The Mound of the Riders and its cold spears lay grey 
"are down in the valley!"" "
good.' 
"     As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that "
"Stevie Monini,4041591957556641,15-09-1993
"
"""Well, Merry People!"" said Bilbo looking out. ""What time by the moon is this? "
"     'No, no! ' said Gollum. 'Smjagol promised.' "
""
     'Then  why do you do their work far them?' said Sam  angrily. 'Who sent 
"Lucine Siemens,4017957492956333,01-03-1987
"
"night  or  two, but  even  that  was  becoming  less  and  less  usual.  The "
no crust for your supper!' 
"####-     ' ""To Bag End,"" says they. "
windows lights stared out like small red eyes. He wondered if they were some 
need  rest before your venture. if  go you must.' He laid  his  hand on  the 
"failed the other, nor shall fail. Now, as you know, we have laid Thjoden the "
"Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.' "
"it.'  The three  hobbits  came  on, and then  the ruffians  turned and  fled "
"     Frodo thought for a while. `Make it fast to that stump, Sam! ' he said. "
"Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject, "
about the inn being closed?' 
needed;  and I  shall not  have  to call on  Gimli for  words  of the secret 
"Angel Appleton,4529968719537583,24-02-1998
"
"     'Well, come along in your own time!' said Merry. 'We are going on.' "
"Higher Up.  First they  say  it's a great Elf in bright armour, then  it's a  "
"East, upon which shadows lay no more, then  all  the bells rang, and all the "
"""No you don't!"" they said. ""Let your legs take their share, we have carried you "
"     `You  don't know  much  even  about them, if you  think old Barliman is "
"     'Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike "
wilderness.' 
"Armies,  and  it  was  very  terrible.  Upon  one  side  were  the  Goblins  and  the  wild "
"the ring, a finger still thrust within its circle. It shone now as if verily "
"down and gone to sleep  together days ago, if you hadn't been so dogged. But "
"     The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They "
lift  and haul them  over the ground that the  Company  now had to cross. It 
"wrath. ""That stone was my father's, and is mine,"" he said. ""Why should I purchase "
snowy  white  as  the  hart  had  been  dark.  They  glimmered  in  the  shadows.  Before 
"come to the bottom of the Coomb, where  the road from Helm's  Deep "
####- 
"""Yes,  yes!""  they  said,  though  everybody  knew  they  could  not  have  been  long "
"The Elvenking himself, whose eyes were used to things of wonder and beauty, "
"among us out of strange places, and walk visible under the Sun.' "
course of the  Loudwater  southwards;  and  there  many of  them  long dwelt 
"life; and now  they walked like men in a  hideous dream made true,  and they "
"was careful never to become invisible. Still, I daresay, more was guessed than was "
"     'Easy said,' objected Sam. 'Better wait till morning and more light.' "
"dwarves.  ""O!  why  did  we  not  remember  Beorn's  advice,  and  Gandalf's!""  he "
already  thrusting along the road  and  was no more than three  leagues away.  
""
"of her dark  hair were touched  by no frost, her white arms and  clear  face "
"     'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,' said Legolas. "
"of Durin till he wakes.  Farewell! ' He bowed, and turned away, and hastened "
"     'No man knows,' said  Thjoden:  'yet ancient legend, now seldom spoken,  "
     the Elven-stars as jewels white  
"It was driven  by outlandish  folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long "
"     'Ah! now you are asking much,' said Gandalf. 'The little that I know of "
haven't got him yet.' 
Lord of  the Rings wou ld learn of  its hiding place and  would bend  all his 
     'Not our order s!' said one of the earlier voices. 'We have come all the 
"     `It's saying a lot too much,' said Frodo, and he laughed,  a long clear "
"     There was a  rush of  hoarse laughter, like the fall  of sliding stones "
""
Mark; for better help you will not  find. No counsel have I to give to those 
     `Can we?' said Frodo. 
"""Now  I  will  make  you  an  offer.  I  have  got my  ring  and will  creep  down  this "
 
The most  that  can  be  said  for  the  dwarves  is  this:  they  intended  to  pay  Bilbo 
""
     Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day. 
"coming  of another  day of  fear they walked  in silence with  bowed  heads,  "
"Strider, and  yet  not Strider; for  the  weatherworn Ranger  was  no longer  "
"cliffs, knife-edged against the sky  far above.  So deep and narrow was that "
that you should ascend and speak with them.' 
midges than water!' 
"####-""Balin  and  Dwalin,""  they  said  not  daring  to  be  offended,  and  sat  flop  on  the "
####-fool about  with boats on that big  river   - and that  isn't  natural. Small 
     Sam turned away and sighed: 'I wish I was going back to Lurien!' 
4. Of the Finding of the Ring  
""
"summers that people could remember; but October had  come, and it must "
     And at the gates the trumpets rang. 
"     `A  pity I didn't think of bringing another length,' said Frodo; `but I "
"     Taurelilumla-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurla Lumlanor,1 "
"Silvie Winspire,4041595243973,08-04-1986
"
     At the south  end of the greensward  there  was an opening.  There  the 
"Roland Embury,4999506929944313,12-03-1978
"
nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering.  He was altogether wretched. 
"####-""What  shall  we  do,  what  shall  we  do!""  he  cried.  ""Escaping  goblins  to  be "
"on end,  and the ever -deepening gloom had slowly  weighed down his heart. He "
"they were  carried off into the forest before the  battle,  even  before you  "
Common Speech a fter their fashion. 
"Colin Burgan,4041372678717089,05-10-1983
"
"smote the hills and  echoed  in the hollows, rising  in a mighty shout above "
"Ida Forrestor,4344695840819357,20-05-1983
"
"""Don't pinch!"" said his eagle. ""You need not be frightened like a rabbit, even if "
"Long and searchingly he questioned the dwarves about their doings, and where "
The Eagles are  coming! The hosts of Mordor looked up and wondered what 
that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead. 
"####-treacherous  and  pretty  bad  lots;  some  are  not,  but  are  decent  enough  people  like "
was probably already under the  dreadful  spells of  the Barrow-wights about 
     At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistled  
"Starlene Formby,4041378783303335,04-12-1980
"
     'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!' 
"catching  their packs  to  the  straps  about  their  shoulders. Fili  took  this  in his hand, "
not there. Gollum lifted his head. 
"frightened, and  he's very tired, and this hobbit's  not nice,  not nice  at "
"you still in prison, or are you free? If you want food, and if you want to go on with "
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo 
seemed less pale and empty. 
""
were on very friendly  terms with Bilbo and  Frodo. They  lived  on the Hill  
"is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still  upon "
"Ulrich Legrand,4041593624612,02-06-1995
"
""
"off him),  and doing his best  to  appear wise  and prudent  and professional  and  live "
"Brandywine. To the South, over  the  line of  the Withywindle,  there was  a  "
pearl mouth-pieces and bound with fine-wrought silver.  'Think of me when you  
"will  take me  along  quiet  to a fire, where I can dry-and then you will let me speak "
"Ryley Trowbridge,4017955302521214,03-08-1980
"
"exclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk  in these  pans, why  don't we look for  "
"lands  that  are  now  lost.  They  dwelt  most  often  by  the  edges  of  the  woods,  from "
####- 
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs. 
"that moment  the  rider  sat up,  and  shook the  reins.  The  horse stepped "
again.' 
they heard the whinny  of a horse borne up from the plains upon the  eastern 
which he made almost  as hideous as  his own language.  'Rest while you can!  
"not allowed. It was not  enough for him to find his master, he  had still to "
"Deloria Bunhill,4041599843713524,30-04-1982
"
beside Frodo for a  while. Neither spoke. Slowly the light  grew. Suddenly a  
ran  along as they hurried  forward; and there seemed to  be a sound of many  
 
"     They stumbled a fter him  wondering what had happened.  Doom,  doom "
"He shivered a little. 'What I really need is something warm,' he said. 'It's "
hair. But I had reasons for  trying; some  merciful and some less so.  First  
"on the grass,  as he  told them. Then they lay basking  in the  sun with the "
####-sign of Tom disappearing!  
wield it. 
     'Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust?' 
"afraid, per haps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things. "
"     'Put  those  Halflings  down!'  ordered  Ugl®k,  taking  no  notice  of "
lies were too much alike for my comfort.  Clearly the ring had an unwholesome 
"wild  howls  of  laughter.  Stones  began  to  fall  from the mountain-side, "
was served on a long  bare table that  had not been scrubbed  for weeks. The 
"""Where is Gandalf?"" asked Bilbo, moving off to find something to eat as quick "
If ever beyond  hope you return to the lands of the living and we retell our 
"""It's  a  cold  lonesome  place,""  said Bombur.  ""There may  be  drink,  but  I  see  no "
would 
     Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied  that they 
     The  hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves  for  the  most  
"horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.' "
"struck  all of  them  as not  at  all  a nice place,  although  there was nothing wrong  to "
my part to strike any blow again.' 
lead any living creature hither by word or sign?' 
a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface  out beyond  
"you.  It  will  aid  you  in  your  bargaining.""  Then  Bilbo,  not  without  a  shudder,  not "
"northwards. When I  was sent out as a messenger, I passed through the Gap by "
"     `And  who  are you, and what have  you to do with  Minas Tirith?' asked "
"think  you will  be able  to  drag your Bill  inside, into  the long dark of "
"Leonerd Binyon,4041378880264,25-02-1991
"
"""Then what did yer say it was grey for?"" said Bert. "
     Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir! 
"the same, that did not matter.  Many people  from other parts of  the  Shire "
and  their coming  was like  the  falling  of  small stones  that starts  an 
"clouds,  the black outline  of a tall ship with torn sails riding up  out of "
waybread of the Elves. and they drank a little. But of their water they were 
"black.  Somehow  the  killing  of  the  giant  spider,  all  alone  by  himself  in  the  dark "
"to  go east, since we have  been tracked by Gollum,  and  must fear that the "
"king. The  start had been slower than was  hoped, for it had  taken time for  "
"Julienne Schruyer,4017950484170,06-07-1979
"
 
"####-very well  at  first,  but  he was  given  away  in  the  end  by  his wet  footsteps  and  the "
the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain  mass. But 
"     'Yes, sir. I'll last for a bit now, sir.' "
`And what's his Precious? Does he mean the' 
     And with that he  bade Halbarad unfurl  the great standard which he had 
"the Barrow,  nor  the  message  of  Gandalf;  but  something  seemed  to  be "
"Orcs,"" he said,  ""so I was sent. And I have had a perilous journey, and I am "
"Georgi Germann,4041593551690,24-12-1981
"
Lord of the Eagles also was there and was speaking to Gandalf. 
Aragorn 
     an old man in a battered hat 
     Eglerio! 
     It was more than my desire. 
"     `Very well,' said Bilbo. `I will do as you bid. But I will now tell the "
disturbed  stones  went  bounding  and  spinning  among  the  bracken  and  the  pine-
"Orson Tumini,4041592362834,25-02-1997
"
"Hunger,  perhaps,  more than mistrust kept him wakeful: he had begun to long "
"but  he  was  in fact now facing southwards,  as  he  came back to  Shelob's "
"him,  and  ring  or  no  ring  he  trembled  with  fear  lest  they  should  discover  him. "
"milder, and the  wolves  that had once  come ravening  out of the  North  in "
of falling water grew dim and was lost in gathering shadow. Always the sound 
"bring the crown to me,  and let Mithrandir set it upon my  head, if he will; "
     'Look!' he said. 'The tree is glad of the fire!' 
"     On the south-eastern  side  the ground fell very  steeply,  as  if  the "
""
"more, there was a great burning, but between it and the Riders lines of fire "
"have  a  fill of mine! There's no hurry, we have  all  the day before us!"" Then Bilbo "
"the Closed Door, and men were bearing Faramir before him.' "
     `And I hope he's  up to  no  tricks. And anyway I  hope he doesn't fall 
"Dyanna Cars,4041370475082046,07-04-1979
"
said Aragorn.  'More  hope we  have to defend you  in  the Hornburg than  in 
"Jasun Litchfield,4041378515078114,10-02-1984
"
"many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs, "
"the most savage Orc  entrapped, had ever thus  endured  her, or set blade to "
"Taffy Skill,4017957945231508,04-06-1985
"
"furniture would  fit.  In  short Bilbo was  ""Presumed Dead,""  and not  everybody  that "
"coats  glistened, their  long tails flowed  in the  wind, their  manes  were "
""
"     'No other folk  make such  a trampling,' said Legolas. 'It seems  their "
at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.' 
"     'We have watched too long,' said Merry. 'There's Ugl®k! I don't want to "
"remain and ride  with the  Rohirrim,  they  may do so. But  I shall take the "
indeed  he  seemed  to  be  in  a  splendidly  good  humour  and  set  them  all  laughing 
"crook -legged creature, very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the "
let on about.' 
"could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that  brought  sudden fear "
"do  next?  These  questions  they  asked  over  and  over  again,  and  it  was  from  little "
"Danica Hourston,4017951058792075,19-11-1976
"
""
"Garek Gibbin,4041373058217120,20-03-1985
"
"They  climbed  long  stairs,  and  turned  and  went  down  wide  echoing  ways,  and "
"he could  conceal  it, they saw  through the mask the anguish of  a  mind in "
"usually venture very  far  from  their mountains, unless  they  are driven out  and  are "
""
"a  few polite  questions about  their travels,  but hardly  listened  to the "
"     a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises! "
on mounting. If they had had no  larger companions the  hobbits  would  soon 
"####-     'He  drew  himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were making a  "
     'Get up! ' said Frodo. 
"never has  any league of peoples been more blessed, so that neither has ever  "
sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of 
"job? And  when it's done, what are we  going to do then? This waybread keeps "
"are  only  waiting,  because  they  think  that   their  purpose  is  almost  "
"Channa Terlinden,4291468674101158,21-01-1992
"
"####-'You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so  I may  as well do the "
"was a merry one.  For a while  they walked and talked, rejoicing for a brief "
"with  his beautiful plan,  since that horrible  light  had  so  unexpectedly "
all round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the  wall into the  
"Maddened and angry they were leaping and howling round the trunks, and cursing "
nostari!' he said. 'It is sad that we should meet only  thus at  the ending. 
"sign of food. A dragon would always be hungry in such parts."" "
"""Lovely  titles!""  sneered  the  dragon.  ""But  lucky  numbers  don't  always  come "
the herbs of healing?' 
as long as Stinker still had  a  chance  of laying hands  on his 'Precious'. 
"bank; for  the wind was colder, and  the clouds closer and greyer; there was "
"their hands; but  alone in the  porch upon  the topmost step stood Beregond, "
"longer. 'Some of my kin look just  like trees now, and need something  great "
"mountain-field of grass and heath, high above the deep -delved courses of the "
"feeling had come upon  him, and it  deepened as he walked on into the Naith: "
splendid  than  anything that he had dreamed of;  greater and  stronger than 
"mind.  We don't get  Outsiders  -  travellers from the  Shire, I should  say, "
"River. So Radagast said to me."" "
"Ki Aindriu,4017957720113,28-06-1992
"
"yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruffians!' "
     'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more 
alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.' 
"from you rather than  from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave "
"alas, have happened before. Of  the tales that  we have heard  this  day the "
"mile. We can't jump it, and we daren't try to wade or swim."" "
"when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?' "
"greener about  the edges of  the  glade, enclosing  it with  an almost solid "
"the harps!"" "
     Gil-galad was an Elven-king. 
"good, and it smells good,' he said. "
"his fear of the Orcs, or even of the light. After a year  or two he left the "
####-with his funny stories; nor did they have to wonder long where he had been or why 
"chiefly come  for, and he would  still stick to him. His master would not go "
"that way.  The  river  rushed  up  in  steam  and  a  fog  fell  on Dale, and  in  the  fog  the "
"travellers it always seemed,  to  the brink of the  deep valley of Rivendell "
"old laid in  sleep beneath the  pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so  by "
The Return Journey 
"levels and  became broader  and shallower,  wandering off towards the Marish "
flagons were set. Soon they began to drink and laugh merrily. Luck of an unusual 
"It would not last very much longer. Already  the night was old. In the East, "
came back. I could sleep!' 
     In sunlight or in shade; 
"ward, and rolled headlong into the hall! "
as  sheerly as  ever down into Gorgoroth. Ahead the water -course came  to an 
sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their  ponies up the last  steep 
I came at once.' 
the rock far  wider than any  they had yet passed; and out of it came a reek  
"There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down "
seemed  to cheer their hearts; for a while they sat together on the brink of 
"Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of  whom  we have yet "
"     'He left a message,' said  Merry, 'and  I was coming to  it, but I have "
""
And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that Lugb®rz wants.' 
good a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for  the food came 
turning  all the wide  looming darkness into a   chill  pale grey scored with 
"Lock -bearer, wherever thou goest  my thought goes with thee. But have a care "
"been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the "
""
heard no sound of walker or rider. 
led by Mablung; and so the ambush was itself trapped. For horsemen went 
     `And  one Hobbit! ' cried Merry. `Not all of us look on  boats as  wild 
"Huorns were  digging great  pits  and  trenches, and making  great pools and "
"roam the wild for a time, until he perished far from his home or was trapped "
"if he could only struggle on just a little way further up, they would strike "
north and west into the gathering night for a long while. 
"companions,  to help him on his way.  You may tarry,  or come back, or  turn "
man could look. Here and there were clefts  in the  stone  through which men 
"have  always  elected masters  from  among  the old  and wise,  and have not  endured "
"Jay Gaunt,4041373114545,30-11-2001
"
"House  of Eorl,  old though  he be,' he  said. 'But those who truly love him "
"Dasya Labbet,4643120993756,26-08-1996
"
     Tom's going on ahead candles for to kindle. 
     Chapter 5   A Conspiracy Unmasked   
""
"struck by lightning, we shall be picked up by some giant and kicked sky-high for a "
autumn trees seemed to  be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below 
"     Her hair was long, her limbs were white, "
"these policies comes the Ring of Power, the foundation of Barad-dyr, and the "
     Ere  noon the army  came  to  Osgiliath.  There  all  the  workers  and 
"memory of our friend,' he cried.  'But  as for your  terms, we  reject  them "
"Jacinda Freemantle,4017958612719296,05-08-1999
"
""
seemed  dark and warm after the clear air  upon the hill.  The hall was long 
"the Smjagol, less than the old. "
"his father,  the Old  miller,  had  a  black  beard,  and he  was  not named "
"and raw  coney chokes me. If you give  me a coney, the coney's mine, see, to "
at them all in turn. 
pale  gold. High  amid  the branches of a  towering  tree that stood in  the 
"don't say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I'm getting so mixed up. You  "
 
side. 
Bilbo gave  to him as a parting gift. To these four  volumes there was added  
""
"names tell you the story of the things they belong to in my language, in the "
     Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you! 
though sunlight was in  the sky above. Of their own stooping forms no shadow 
"as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that will not be long.' "
     `But now  the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur's 
turned against him; victory was slipping from his grasp even as he stretched 
"waited and explored the  ground  down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to  "
"Than gold won by mining, "
     He walked alone and sorrowing. 
"tiresome,  uncomfortable  adventure!  I  wish  I  was  back  in  my  hobbit-hole  by my "
a silver hafted axe in a belt crusted with scarlet stones. 
"""Where are your friends now, and what are they doing?"" "
"Quickly Sam passed the door and hurried on to the second storey, dreading at "
"Freeman Pernell,4041598983607298,12-10-1975
"
"against  the  stone.  If  that  is  done  without  deceit,  then  we  will  depart,  and  the  elf-"
burning of the chief wolf's nose and the death from the wizard's fire of many of his 
"     'But  as  he  lowered his eyes, he saw far above  the tops of the Misty "
""
One good turn deserves another.' 
"wise  to  tell  him  their  whole  story  and  the  reason  of  their  journey,  so  that  they "
####-me. 
"camp  then  to  a  long  valley,  narrower  than  the  great  dale  in  the  South where  the "
we pursued  took captive two of my friends. In such need a man  that  has no  
"again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old and "
villain coming nosing round? I wish he had been  shot!' He sat down by Frodo 
"weapons they hung on their  leather belts under  their jackets, feeling them "
"     'I don't see how our food can be  made  to  last,' said Frodo. 'We have "
again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn't taken the vittles with him.' 
"(empty) book -case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than  usual "
and homelike enough to  dispel  the last of  Sam's misgivings (already  much 
"Abbie Burney,4041598979522212,29-08-1987
"
"outpost, and  to rebuild  the  bridge for the  passage of our arms. And then "
dwarves! 
small room looking out west on to the garden.  The late afternoon was br ight  
land  and  they  could  see only  the higher shoulders and the  far eastward 
written reams of good advice for more than half a century. 
"Black Breath,' said  Aragorn.  'He is a man of  staunch will, for already he "
"In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for "
"wholly into  decay. But they did not forget their danger, nor the Black Gate "
in the wind. As when death  smites the swollen brooding thing  that inhabits 
""
"was almost silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears. "
skill. Must they swim?' 
urgent. Let us enter! For  it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope 
beyond price and count. 
     Suddenly  Aragorn leapt to  his feet. 'How the wind howls! '  he cried. 
"""Well,"" said Bilbo, after giving him a long chance, ""what about your guess?"" "
"and dwells nearest to this place. Bid him hasten!"" "
"field, and a dozen  were prisoners. Nineteen hobbits  were killed, a nd  some "
"and  the  road  after  a  while,  when  he  left  the  newly made  path  and  climbed  down "
to  the  forest.  The  Lonely  Mountain!  Bilbo  had  come  far  and  through  many 
like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What 
"On  Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared "
"him, if you can help it. He'll be quieter, if you don't. Smjagol! They won't  "
"a  hatred of things that go free upon the  earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, "
"Britta O'Sherrin,4453868029238858,20-01-1999
"
"nothing else for a  while.  Then slowly on the surface, where  the  wizard's "
tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for  
"seemed pretty low in the water, and he guessed that these had dwarves inside. "
the night was not  yet  old and  for hours the dark journey  would go on. He 
"     `But the wearing is slow in Lurien,' said Frodo. `The power of the Lady "
"Goatleaf that used to be on the West -gate, and that Bill Ferny, they came in "
"that will  keep  you as busy and as  happy as anyone can be, as long as your "
"at  them with wonder, for he  knew  then that  they must be D®nedain  of the "
as merry as if the story was already written. But you've left out one of the 
down  the gates  and passed  through Bree  like  a  howling  wi nd;  and  the 
"Chandler Wards,4041596485672,20-02-1992
"
"     Home is behind, the world ahead, "
"that little frightened rat, I do believe  there's  nobody left alive  in the "
"Janel Hornbuckle,4041598767264142,03-10-1979
"
"they reached  the bottom  of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small "
"great wind blowing,  and the rain flying north, and the sun shining. In that "
out  of  them  than  out  of  Thorin.  They  were  surly  and  angry  and  did  not  even 
"Candy Tawse,4041598944284013,20-09-1982
"
"Minas Tirith. But for myself, and any that will go with me . . .' "
"Jillene Gwinnett,4017957962186,02-08-1985
"
"Emmet Corkel,4041373578371910,09-09-2000
"
""
"Marla Elcocks,4041378215653059,27-08-1991
"
"wonder what was bothering his companion. 'He has grown, or something. He "
flickered as he held it up before them in his trembling hand. 
""
"Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry  another eighteen pence "
"     'We aren't, and we haven't,' growled Sam. 'But we'll go if we must.' "
"     Now the four companions  went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning "
"heard  songs  of  many  battles,  and  I  have  always  understood  that  defeat  may  be "
"     The Company rested now for a while,  drifting south on the current that "
"Clim Deakes,4041592919210426,22-06-1994
"
looked hard at one another. 
know about. The things inside know: the Silent Watchers.' 
ill 
Good evening!' 
his long  slow  story would  make  a  tale for which we  have no  time  now.  
"rose; and when they had clothed her and set her arm in a sling of linen, she "
hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of  the dell nearest to 
"casks, came out more or less smiling, with only a bruise or two and a stiffness that "
"enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, "
hauberk had pierced the sinew behind his mighty knee. 
"     Elrond greeted  them gravely and graciously, and Galadriel  smiled upon  "
""
"Ruperto Son,4597044519153596,17-06-1992
"
about him. He wondered if he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath.  
     'The Paths of the Dead!' said Gimli.  'It is a fell name; and little to 
"Jada Raybould,4041377068057806,03-09-2000
"
"Mattias Stiebler,4041593769952604,11-04-1987
"
"For  a  while  he stood in thought,  silent  upon the threshold, while those "
cracked and stones fell from the roof on their heads. What would have happened if 
"Kayla Walworth,4017958667149,31-07-1995
"
"     'Never is too long a word even for me,' said Treebeard. 'Not while your "
"oily many-coloured ooze lay at its bottom.  In  this evil hole they cowered, "
"cat he calls her, but she owns him not) Sauron would send her prisoners that "
and  turned  their angry  thoughts  towards Thorin and his company. Wild and bitter 
who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.' 
"were hobbits,  in spite of their strange gear, then he brightened and wished "
"     They  at once gave  up any  idea of going back. Frodo led  the way, and "
through that shuddering cry he  heard  winding  up from below the sound of a 
looking out west and north to the way that he must tread. 
"Kibil-nvla,  and  fair were  the many-pillared halls  of Khazad-dym in Elder  "
"     the wide-walkers, water drinking; "
"####-The wind was on the withered heath, "
"Mountains of  Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a  remnant "
to think. 
"     'Very  well,' said Frodo,  trying to appear unconcerned. 'I'll talk  to "
"I  said, the Big Bosses, ay,' his voice  sank almost to a whisper, `ay, even "
"""I  am  he  that  buries  his  friends  alive  and  drowns  them  and  draws  them  alive "
"ready for such a  trial, if indeed I  shall ever be so:  But even if I found "
     But  at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of 
"The very air seemed brown, and  all things  about were  black  and grey  and "
before whom an old man wrapped in cloak and hood bore a strong casket of iron-
""
"hole and out through the hill,' he said. "
"where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned to him. He was in "
had not yet given  thought  to the fate of  the palantnri of Gondor  in  its 
"Carlee Poncet,4041597151763354,26-09-1981
"
"improved  with  the  best  advice.  So  the  time  came  to  mid-  summer  eve,  and  they "
smoke hung  and wrapped itself about the sides  of Orthanc. I stood alone on  
"of  dark-grey  and  black  moths,  some  nearly  as  big  as  your  hand,  flapping  and "
"     'The road  that I speak  of leads to the Mines of Moria,' said Gandalf.  "
     'Is everything ready?' asked Bilbo. 'Everything packed and la belled?' 
"and in its place was set in mockery a round rough-hewn stone, rudely painted "
"     'Now you,  Frodo  and Samwise, will come  with me  and my guards,' said "
the motives  and meaning  of  the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a  
"grim hillmen without a  captain.  Fisher -folk of the Ethir, some hundred  or  "
dike  that men  have  thought secure.  But  the  mind  and will of the Black  
"at  all,  it  is,""  said  he.  ""No  burra-  hobbits,  but  lots  of  these  here  dwarves.  That's "
creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some fox-trick.' 
"across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe the elven-hoods "
"Al Pettifer,4021945699599141,17-01-1985
"
"northerly end, which pointed towards the Mountain, could not be  seen at all. Only "
"undergrowth. The ground was  rising  steadily,  and as they went  forward it  "
"celebrate the  victory at the Ford  of Bruinen, and you will all be there in "
They are not natives here; they are crebain  out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do 
"Malachi Hayto,4017952238301,06-07-1980
"
were to go on again with the early sun on midsummer morning. 
"open only to the South. Once  it had been fair and green, and through it the "
     In terror they  stumbled  on. Soon the road bent sharply eastward again 
"naturally  attractive,  when  the  lives  of   an  author  and  critic  have "
"He promised to deal  with the amazing events at Bree, and so  give a bit  of "
shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk. 
was 
"the  North and all round the wood of  Laurelindurenan, which they could  not "
"Men, where his dad was the  Miller and his own master.  Pimple's idea was to "
"longer: you  had become visible to  them, being already on the threshold  of "
suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over  with silver cobwebs.  'How  are 
"It was not really the right time for this riddle, but Bilbo was in a hurry. Gollum "
####- 
""
had hunting-bows. More were still coming in from outlying farms. 
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!' 
     In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. 
"and as he  looked  towards  it,  to his alarm  Bilbo now saw two small points of light "
"ago, it seems.  ""It may be a help in many needs,"" he said: Haldir, or one of "
     Death in the morning and at day's ending  
"Saruman  has  become evil,  as  you  say, then  their  doom  cannot  be long "
"Helaine Tesche,4041596649260585,01-12-1992
"
you that I feel responsible. 
####-     It  was difficult and dangerous moving in  the  night  in the  pathless 
"the  doorstep  long  enough,  I daresay you will  think of  something. And well, don't "
"Bilbo heard these words and he grew afraid, wondering what would happen, if "
There was a light like a pale but hot fire behind his eyes. 
that the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell. 
"Fred Stockill,4017956292691660,15-02-1980
"
"away. Hours, I should think.' He hesitated. 'What can  I  do? ' he muttered. "
"     'In the realm of Gondor,' the wizard answered. 'The land  of Anurien is "
song without their music. 
"     the trees may bud, the wa ters run, "
never been moved or changed for generations. They say  the Old Took lived in 
old and their like is not in the world today. Then I was but young and tender. Now 
to work it out and see if it came to a compliment. 
Gildor; 'but I perceive that he is  - strange indeed though that seems to me. 
names in the rolls of their descent dearer than the names of sons. Childless 
"####-though that is not swift down in  the South,  we had no help  of wind. Heavy "
"above, for else his fever and sickness were not  to be understood; since the "
"     Immediately, though everything  else remained as before,  dim and dark, "
'That was a strange deed!' 
"least shall go with him. It  is  hardly  possi ble to separate  you from him, "
"mingling of many  companies of various  kinds  they had not been missed, not "
"course, beyond wondering where he is and what's happened to him.' "
"Rivendell for some days, and they sat much with  their old friend, who spent "
####-out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last  
"of  the  Coomb-side  the  westering  moon  rode,  glimmering yellow  in  the "
"opening in the turf,  birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of Gondor now "
the East Road anxiously.' 
"and  the  goblins  did  not  wait  to  find  out.  It  was  deep,  deep,  dark,  such  as  only "
Enemy of Sauron; and my work  is finished. I shall go soon. The  burden must  
business to ask questions after nightfall.' 
"steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to  go down "
"Teddie Inglesant,4256072260901725,04-11-1981
"
will  all go grey  again. What a  pity! This  shaggy  old  forest  looked so 
     He crept on;  and  as he went  he wondered how many  orcs lived  in the 
Bilbo  that  they seemed  to expect  to get  the answers. From which you can see  that 
"son of Isengrim the Second,  was four foot five and able to ride a  horse. He "
"     'Sleep while you  may,' said Mablung. `But  the Captain will return, if "
In  this  way  they  were  all  soon  on  the  far  bank  safe  across  the  enchanted 
"brought  up  dry  boughs  for  fuel,  and  they  had  brought  rabbits, hares, and a  small "
"remember that he said: ""May you have joy of  the sight! But we cannot linger "
"darkness grew. It  stepped forward slowly on to  the bridge, and suddenly it "
"stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and gazing "
"that his house would be full again on many future  nights, until the present "
are going.' 
"panting, holding their  heads down. They  were  a gang of the smaller breeds "
would welcome your company.' 
"the house  of Elrond  it is told that they were at Ann®minas, and  Amon Syl, "
"Zechariah Copestick,4041376281671,23-12-1999
"
"of the Nazgyl,  as you thought, he would have died that night. This hurt was "
"The river is flowing, "
"especially on the  higher slopes of the hill, above the  houses of  the Men. "
"without sound or footfall.  Pippin soon began  to feel sleepy, and staggered "
wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of his line had the power of 
""
"was one  swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with  a knowing  and "
left far behind. 
     Rover! Trover! 
of their errand. Better mistrust undeserved  than rash words. And the memory 
"     `Seeing this, we  turned aside and came by  the Southward road '  Frodo "
"When  the  barrels  were  empty  the  elves  cast  them  through  the  trapdoors, "
long-armed  crook -legged Orcs. They  had a red eye painted on their shields.  
"locusts. They ride upon wolves and Wargs are in their train!"" "
he's the hero or the villain?  
"####-Mark my words: if ever we get to the pass, he  won't let us really take  the "
"among  the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of "
paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be silent! ' 
into his voice. 'The Lady's  gift! The star-glass! A light  to you  in  dark 
For  thy hope is  but ignorance. Go then and labour in healing! Go forth and  
     For  a  moment Thjoden  and Jomer  and all  his men  stared at  them in 
and they're fire-raising as they come. Curse them!' 
"Sarette Birkin,4041596938598711,08-04-2000
"
"grinning  gates of  Minas Morgul. and the  haunted Mountains, and it  looked "
"Leighton Spurdens,4049954737040678,24-03-1998
"
and blew a ringing blast. 
"     They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner, and blew "
"     'You can have what I have  got left,' said Merry,  'if you will wa it  a  "
quarrelling 
office.' And he held out a  white rod; but Aragorn took the  rod and gave it 
beneath the sky! 
"     Presently he noticed a man, clad  in  black and white, coming along the "
cries; but stretching away into the distance behind there  were ordered rows 
"across  their path,  rushing through the  bent  grasses.  Suddenly Shadowfax "
"it was turning colder, but the rain was gone. "
"years and  years. He  caught me  several times trespassing after  mushrooms,  "
"deep  in the  darkest  dales there  are hundreds and  hundreds  of  them,  I "
pain  like  a  dart  of  poisoned ice  pierce his left shoulder. Even  as he 
"or  which kept nearer to the straight. Which should they take, the  left, or  "
of snakes were swimming up from the southern end. 
     `But I  stray. We in  the house of Denethor  know much  ancient lore by 
"Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gluin;  and  in a corner alone Strider was sitting, "
"Sun sinks early. The Orcs will  not, maybe, come out till after dusk, but we "
"Colleen Romera,4041591617357893,24-03-1987
"
"you  see  'prisoners'  had  meant  'prisoners  rescued  from  the  goblins'  only,  and  not "
"debate. Then he came back, and  slowly  putting out  a trembling  hand, very "
ever they heard of it! And may I live   to tell them and hear them sing.  But 
####-from  Dale  to Rivendell  would long  ago  have become  impossible. They are 
"     'We  will come and  look at them,' said  Strider,  picking  up a stick. "
####-Ring-bearer's voice surely should be heard? ' 
"""These look like good blades,"" said the wizard, half drawing them and looking "
must be!' 
then dancing among  the  trees he began  to  sing a  song  to  infuriate  them and bring 
"Angil Worsom,4452661898246,07-03-1993
"
"guidance. Less than  an hour  had  passed, and they had reached the Fords of "
"melting icicles of moonlight. But he did not pause to admire it, and turning "
"     'Your duty is wi th your people,' he answered. "
"Rubia Doxey,4041590180105705,26-04-1981
"
"not have gone any further, even if they had dared. "
Kings made tombs more  splendid than  houses of the living. and counted  old 
"were many  voices round about, and though orc-speech  sounded  at all  times "
"Lewes Gon,4041373501714251,18-02-1983
"
"Cally Janssen,4041590468742674,27-03-1996
"
"he asked, and a  curious  change came  over  his voice.  It  was sharp  with "
####- 
Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.' 
could one want?  
treasure  which  they  had  caught  as  they  went  along  had  rekindled  all  the  fire  of 
"corners  of  the  Bree-land.  Merry's  ponies  had  escaped altogether,  and "
had expected. Each one of his folk was clad in a hauberk of steel mail that hung to 
"     He looked back, and then he looked up; and he was amazed to see how far "
They  reached  the  skirts  of  the  Mountain  all  the  same  without  meeting  any 
"Zonnya Hause,4041374091007,15-12-1979
"
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big  Folk could hardly  beg for lodgings 
brigand or orc-chieftain that ordered the assault upon the Lord  of Mordor's 
"his place was  and had been: at  his master's side, though what he  could do "
"with all the speed they  could, pausing seldom. Swift and  enduring were the "
"     'Yes,' said  Gandalf.  'If you  have  walked all these days with closed "
"small, and altogether alone: grey  and bent, like a  wizened tree before the "
became a garden of flowers and trees and brought forth fruit. He had only to 
that is how the situation arose.' 
was that  the grey cloaks Of Lurien and  the grey timber of the  elf-wrought 
yet to  what evil end  he toiled and endured he did not dare to think. There 
"Vanni Le Blanc,4293561687051,17-01-1998
"
"Jennee Teasdale-Markie,4739812134884087,18-10-1982
"
"behind. But Sam would have laughed, if he had dared. Half fearing a breaking "
"Kasper Littrik,4017951559269,10-06-1998
"
"and  he stood listening to  the horns, and it seemed to  him that they would "
not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power! Whoever strikes 
and terrible for any might or valour to conquer. And no news came. After the 
"for  the people to  take,  torn suddenly  from their homes.  There were hard "
"like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under  "
     Then one blew a long call on  a horn.  It  echoed in the  valley. Other  
Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a  
     on Saturday afternoons. 
"week.  It was Thorin,  but  you  could  only  have  told  it  by his golden chain, and by "
the murmuring fir-woods that clothed the steep mountain-sides. The king rode 
door -like opening appeared  at the end of the  chamber beyond  Frodo's feet;  
"Gondor:  that  we should  ride with seven thousands,  scarce  as many as the "
""
"comes early. Let's get on with it!"" "
already? Still here it is------' 
before  Thorin  gave  the  word.  For  Thorin  had  taken  heart  again  hearing  how  the 
charged into the astonished spiders unexpectedly from the side. 
"are kindly to beasts, for they are a good  and wise folk, but they have less "
"     `Hoy  there, Aragorn! '  shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped  into  the "
behind.  They  had eaten nothing  since  the  early morning.  Sam's cut  was 
"but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold but not cruel; "
"even  in the dark.  The  others were in file behind, and  Legolas whose eyes "
"not listen to them. His wi ll was set, and only death would break it. He felt "
"     The  morning dawned bright  and fair; the air  was clean, and the light "
"were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting a s "
"relief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, as "
"     `The eighth is a dwarf,' said Legolas. "
towards Isengard?' 
"Jori Bollum,4816105810315112,25-12-1992
"
"him. Orcs fell over them, snarling and  cursing. Slowly on hand and knee the "
"     'I was,' said Pippin; 'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.' "
he ran out with a horn and blew it loudly. 
into my keeping.' 
"Quintus MacCartney,4017953070799229,06-11-1982
"
mountain  and look down.  Stone-city is shut. Fire burns there  outside; now 
"'to help  Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well, if that is "
since  we can't find a dining-room! ' said  Frodo. He had begun to shake off 
it is mine to think first of its people. To prudence some heed must still be 
"Atlante Timperley,4017954860581,15-06-1994
"
"cunning and by magic moving through him, a fierce and jealous love, the desire of "
to bring  her food. But her lust was  not his lust. Little  she  knew of  or  
the  range of  bowmen on the  wall. But indeed  there were too few  now  left  
"     'We  have  not spoken  to  Haldir of  our  deeds or our purpose,'  said "
would be the last  disaster for himself too. if the Enemy got it. And in the 
"He untied  it and hid  it, and  then he sat down on the wall and wondered anxiously "
be wondered at  that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when 
"     `Dark is  the water  of  Kheled-zvram,' said Gimli, `and  cold are  the "
do  as I might bid. None of my Riders can  bear you as burden. If the battle 
stayed no time in the Elvish country. 
"Gilberte Glidder,4017958195026,05-02-1989
"
"straight  as  a  ruler,  smooth-floored  and  smooth-sided,  going  with  a  gentle  never-"
power and terror they would possess if the Ruling Ring was on their master's 
"Jena Rising,4017951835255,07-03-2001
"
"Viki Risdale,4017952197689,03-01-1985
"
and also I felt certain that I did  not want him to discover  me. I've never 
little  loose  scale of  their armour. There were  lots of dragons  in  the North  in  those 
they  roped  them  together and left them till the morning. Poor dwarves! Bilbo was 
They had not been riding very long when up came Gandalf very splendid on a 
"place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the Captains debated. "
""
greet it.  The Rider s of Rohan sprang suddenly  to life. Horn  answered horn 
"guess.  Perhaps those  in  Lugb®rz  might wonder how, and  why. But  in  the "
"     'He wouldn't hear naught, if some of you here weren't sneaks,' rejoined "
"to risk it, anyhow. I'm going to stew these coneys.' "
Now  there  came  a  glimmer  of  a  red  light  before  them.  The  goblins  began  to 
     But so far trouble had not come;  and as Mr. Baggins was  generous with 
stratagems and wars his mind shook  free; and throughout his realm  a tremor 
"could do nothing, for your will was in his keeping. "
some 
     and people who will see a world  
"####-     'Now,' said Merry,  'if only we had our legs  and hands free,  we might "
seeing as we were all  floating on  the stream together. Just then I saw the 
"short  while, I hope,'  he said.  'But  I am  going down beyond the southern "
blazed with a sudden fire. Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high  
"the  only battle since the  Greenfields, 1147, away up in the Northfarthing. "
all round the hill like  thick  hair that ended sharply in  a circle round a  
""
"     'There  is no need,' said  Gimli. 'The Riders have  left chip and bough "
ferries and boat-bridges that the  enemy had made and in part destroyed when 
"lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of  his power. He greatly desires "
"     They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of  stones, "
"and  little weeping or  murmuring was heard, even in  the  camp in  the Hold "
"have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.' "
"slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as "
"sending out his dark  thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Only to "
"Lucian Reace,4017951170723198,16-05-1975
"
""
"deeds of the Elder Days. They  wondered how  old he was,  and  where he  had "
"####-dwarves,  Mr.  Baggins,  and  many  provisions.  Horses  and  ponies  had  been  sent "
hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease 
spies of Mordor  roaming on the  slopes  of  Amon  Lhaw.  I have never heard 
brown and drear. 
ash-heaps of the Dark Lord. 
"Shandee Laughlin,4763491952976074,27-06-1978
"
their hideous shape. For a moment  Sam caught a  glitter in  the black stones  
"Elfie Bruni,4017955352611808,10-04-1980
"
"Huntington Strivens,4017950567701,30-04-1989
"
was wrought of mithril and gold. 
"from the outer circles, and there was much cheering and crying of  the names "
"`I must rest,' he muttered. "
"explosions and gusts  of fire. One great  coil of  vapour  went whirling up, "
he  had  stepped out of  a thin mist into  a heavier fog. His  weariness was 
"Emile Woofenden,4041598847940000,13-02-1997
"
'Halt! Halt! Who rides in Rohan?' 
"reckon. She's sat on a nail, it  seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't  "
"safe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as if "
"     They  struggled to their  feet, and keeping bent, limping like footsore "
"the edge with it. Down into the water he fell, splash! into the cold dark water with "
     Fare you well! Fare you well! 
"behind.  Luckily  the  whole  head  and  jaws  could  not  squeeze  in,  but  the  nostrils "
"     'You'll find  his  will and all the other documents in there, I think,' "
"     Ted gaped, for at  that moment he first caught sight of the escort that "
"Rora Nickoles,4041375021152284,22-07-1995
"
a little cross. 
At that very moment the  dark form of a  rider loomed up  right  in front of 
"""I will,""  said Thorin  grimly.  ""And  I will  let  you  go  at  that-and may we never "
"Jomer,  'and  we have suffered  much loss of our horses, and that  is ill to "
"was Staddle on the  other side of the hill, Combe  in a deep valley a little "
while he was away  on his former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When 
"origina l Red Book, as it  did  in several of the  copies  and abstracts. But "
"in the side of the  spur, and so went  down  into the plain,  and  on to the "
As  soon  as  the  raft  of  barrels  came  in  sight boats  rowed out  from  the piles of 
"Bilbo,  however,  did  not  feel  nearly  so  hopeful  as  they  did.  He  did  not  like "
"storm. Then  he saw  against  the  Sun, sinking  blood-red into a  wrack  of "
Orod-na-Thfn! 
"left to Merry and  Pippin,  and  it was soon done. The southern gangs, after  "
####-great  Eagle  of  the Misty Mountains;  and  at  length  smelling  battle  from  afar  they 
his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands 
"     'Better times, for Bree at any rate,' said Gandalf.  "
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their  speech is of crushing 
     ?he stay  in Rivendell had  worked a  great wonder of change on him: he 
moment later and found him  chewing something  and muttering  to himself. 
"dark above and silver beneath,  and upon its slender crown it bore one small  "
"Thrain the Old, but now they mined and they tunnelled and they made huger halls "
must deem. 
"almost on to his hands and knees. ""It is long enough without watering it."" "
"from all  but a few  until this  day. And first, so that all  may understand "
"     'To the end of the  journey -- in the  end,' said  Gandalf.  'We cannot "
of my score against you.' 
than the general  darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a 
""
"doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur,  and secretly explored his ways, and "
"Alejandrina Ubsdell,4041597871466,09-07-1980
"
"####-     'No,'  said Gandalf. 'But you  see further ahead in  the  clear  light. "
"that you  will say  cannot be, and I do not fear it. I  can only think  that "
     Merry  yawned. 'Work  it out on your fingers!' he said.  'But you  must  
"River into  the darkness.  Across  the water  there were  shrill  cries, but "
"hiss. ""What has it got in its pocketses? Tell us that. It must tell first."" "
evil errand.' 
"here, for I  must have a  little peace,  alone. You should sleep,  in  a bed "
"always as it now is. Once it was a man,  and did you service in its fashion. "
"elvish country. I took a fancy to it, and  I stowed a coil in my pack. Years "
walls of  Mordor. He  felt  that he had  from now on  only two  choices:  to 
"Gary Olerenshaw,4285720738577,26-04-1981
"
remember  it  was  not  quite  so  tight  for  him  as  it  would  have  been  for  me  or  for 
important families at  the  time which these tales tell of. The genealogical 
see  as  well  as  they  used  a  hundred  years  ago.  Still  twelve  yards  is  as  good  as  a 
"     Then Bilbo woke up and opened his eyes. 'Hullo, Frodo!' he said. 'Well, "
"     They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and "
"in  keeping  a  guard,  while  ruffians  were  still about.  Then  the  four "
and  helped  the  hobbit as well as he could.  In  the darkness  floundering  in  the cold 
"Answer truthfully, if you can.  It will  do you  good not  harm.' He cut the "
     The guests all bounded from their beds 
"####-But he comes around to me, when he gets a chance,  and I see he's better fed "
"accomplished, and that the  Ring  cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that "
"Denethor chose his forayers, who  crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where, "
for you. There it is!' 
"     'I did not answer. He said: ""Who are you?"" I still did not answer,  but "
"with a deadly cry went away westward, outrunning the wind in its fell speed. "
 
"""Very  well  then,""  said  Thorin,  ""supposing  the  burglar-expert  gives  us  some "
"Willi Roelofsen,4041591318894,23-03-1982
"
"be suddenly cut  off. Several of the Riders cried out, and crouched, holding "
"the enemy that roamed outside,  burning field  and tree, and  hewing any man "
poured their arrows into the defending ranks.  But through them  there  came 
"     'It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,' said Frodo. 'That won't  "
"####-""A  little  beer  would  suit  me  better,  if  it  is  all  the  same  to  you, my  good  sir,"" "
and thick warm brown hair like the stuff on their heads (which is curly); have long 
moving in the grass.  
songs of the Vale of Anduin out of vanished years.  
"packages, baggages, tools and paraphernalia that they had brought with them. "
came into his eyes. 
"like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its "
"gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain. "
"hosts of Mordor stood before me, and  I were alone and had no other  refuge. "
"there was a fight, what  he should do. Supposing the king's small escort was "
"     'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love "
places where you will be forced to  carry them. You will come to  the rapids 
"     he turned in haste, and roving still "
"'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! ' "
"the horse to  a  walk,  he turned and looked  back. The Riders seemed to sit "
"Hyacinthie McSherry,4041596114163587,22-02-1985
"
seen  that black shape on  the landing-stage - and heard the queer  sound in 
what of escape? In the dark we  should have passed the signs that led you to 
power -or menace. 
"Natalie Renoden,4041598883951945,29-05-1998
"
and folk that were  afield cried in terror and ran  wild  like  hunted deer. 
"Gandalf worse, I'm thinking.' "
"us live,  yes,  live just a little longer. Lost lost!  We're lost. And  when "
"to  appear lordly and generous as  a king of old, gracious, gentle. That may "
Two of the figures  halted. The   third was taller than  the others: his hair 
     In the forest singing sorrowless. 
But it is  hard! I had counted  on  passing the Golden Perch at Stock before 
     With that they parted.  Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When aft er 
 
"     But Imrahil  said: 'So victory is shorn of gladness,  and  it is bitter  "
"me for supper."" "
"strength or  domination or  hoarded wealth, but understanding,  making,  and "
without  a  word or  a glance at the hobbits  he crawled  away on all fours.  
"####-new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves of Fangorn, and endless "
"splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.' "
"aware of what is going on, so to  speak, than things  are in the  Shire. And "
"and less the world outside where dark things moved, until they came to think "
"Fitz Krug,4041597875954,11-06-1984
"
"Baggins,  who used to vanish with a  bang and a flash and reappear with bags "
"the shores of the Sea, we  should  find no  longer any shelter there. It  is "
meet the eyes. 
"Gae Zavattari,4017956846525844,25-02-1998
"
"Vincenz Dand,4239425772498,27-06-1993
"
"slopes of the hill, silently, creeping  through  the  trees as if  they were "
"     Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked  on a few paces. The gate "
"get to the Under -way.  There's a place there where  we can talk a bit, while "
"Ronald Josovich,4041372336545,20-06-1977
"
cowed.  There  was  much  cursing  and confusion. For  the moment Pippin was 
least a week. I was looking forward to your help.' 
hills to war? He rubbed his  eyes wondering if sleep and shadow had deceived 
the  road  that  led  from  it.  Tools  were  to  be  found  in  plenty  that  the  miners  and 
But  not  here  or now.  maybe. But lest you  still should  think my  tale a  
for trouble.' 
across the hall  through  the  northern  arch light also glimmered faint and 
which the  water. spilled and fed the  falling stream. Up the  green terrace 
"     And many miles be still to go, "
think they  are  not  dead. Orcs bound them.' He paused and  his eyes closed 
 
"Kayla Spencer,4041379106768642,22-01-1988
"
"was very beautiful, and very  useful at  need;  and if anything was wrong or "
"     'Yes, they are  all  safe  and sound,' answered Gandalf.  `Sam was here "
On silver necklaces they strung 
"stir in the heart of it, and it held his eyes, so that now he could not look  "
Frodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.' 
that  are done in  the last defence of your homes. Yet the deeds will not be 
"alone  can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and "
"through the night. They had not long passed the mounds at the Fords of Isen, "
"Gasper Novik,4041593945765029,10-08-1986
"
was no use: probably all the dark distance of Mirkwood lay between them. He sat 
"they left Hobbiton. They followed  no very clear order, for they interrupted "
come? And whither do you go? What is your business?  ' 
"shrieked. There was a quick beat of hoofs, and  even as  Grishnbkh leaped up "
"few servants but many slaves of fear, and still its chief  purpose as of old "
"     'Here do I swear  fealty and  service  to  Gondor, and  to the Lord and "
 
managed  to twist  his neck.  so  as  to  glance back with  one eye over his 
     so juicy-sweet! 
"seemed dry and silent; but refusing to despair Sam stooped and listened, and "
palaces in the world.' 
you. Hobbits are not quite like ordinary people; and after all if their holes are nice 
"Sara-ann Raise,4628842445229015,12-06-1979
"
Chapter 5. A Conspiracy Unmasked 
"     'No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went "
"was strong, even in those days they were wary. They differed from the High Elves "
answers: they were far more concerned with events in the Shire. 
"     'It shall he so,'  said Jomer. 'Legolas upon  my left, and Aragorn upon "
shall the time before your end be made a little longer.' 
outmatch 
led  to  impassable marshes where  the paths had  long been  lost.  Its eastern opening 
"beards dangling down, like old gentlemen gone cracked and playing at being boys. "
their  torches  and  gave  one  yell  before  they  were  killed.  The  ones  behind  yelled 
     'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!' 
"a masterful man, and one  to take what he desired. I journeyed far  with him "
"hand.  He  bitterly  regretted his  foolishness, and reproached himself  for  "
whisper.' 
"Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?' "
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.' 
"Ezra Jimenez,4017958836685653,22-01-1990
"
"     'My master  is  sick and  wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He  can't go  on "
"back to the house. But Faramir for a long while walked  alone in the garden,  "
"ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than a legend of Rohan.' "
voices?' 
"Derwin Seymark,4284125552884052,11-10-1999
"
"valley  between  the mountains. It sloped  up gently  northward,  and at its "
"Rickard Queenborough,4912883553010,28-05-1992
"
"but is this the time, I ask you?' "
####-raid  on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed 
"     It was indeed in deepening gloom that the king came to Edoras, although "
     `Go on!  ' he breathed in  Frodo's ear.  `Have a care to your right. If 
With Tra-la-la-lally 
red eyes that he and Frodo  had  seen from down below by the tunnel's mouth. 
"heart! But how can he win to the  Gate, if these  foul hell-hawks have other  "
"Olimpia Airth,4041596169108073,27-09-1977
"
"might be  good in a  tale,  better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he "
The dark night came on outside. The fires in the middle of the hall were built with 
"     'I did not say that we should hear good news,' said  Aragorn. 'But evil "
"dull  gold, inset with  flowing traceries of  many colours. No  hangings nor  "
"for  himself,  or  at least to snare  some hobbits for his evil purposes. So "
"     'Now you  shut up, Hob Hayward!' cried several of the others. 'You know "
"Wildon Nisot,4041591095047,23-12-1994
"
"Marv Athridge,4041372720509450,25-05-1981
"
"Sterne Blakeway,4017951480177,21-02-1988
"
""
boom. 
"beautiful, very wonderful. He had a ring, a golden ring, a precious ring. "
companion. I am content. We will go together.' 
"""Never you mind,"" said Bilbo. ""A promise is a promise."" "
and so on. 
"####-long-forgotten  were issuing to war from  caves beneath the  hills. A  wall, "
"accustomed  to plenty. The land  was rich and kindly, and though it had long "
last: the fate  of the Bearer  is in  my  hands no  longer .  The Company has 
"guests were  commanded to  sit  quiet,  and were set in chairs,  each with a  "
     He opened his pouch  and drew out  some withered leaves.  `They are dry 
Two  days  later  they  found  their  path  going  downwards  and  before  long  they 
"suddenly with  a deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the  blasts of it "
"of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves. We are stronger than Trolls.  We are made of "
scramble up he heard a cry and a thud. The orc in its wild haste had tripped 
"     when ends the world the music long, "
gave no  more heed  to him. He suddenly remembered his master. He looked  
is. A remarkable place altogether. 
"Harrie Hynes,4041374177110469,22-09-1977
"
large  coal-black  ram.  One  bore  a  white  cloth  embroidered  at  the  edges  with 
"vanishing into the gloom. Sam, supporting and guiding his  stumbling master, "
came. 
cried. 'Come then! We were  soon going to the  Gate  to look  on. We will go 
"     'The biggest  ruffian o' the lot, seemingly,' answered  Cotton. 'It was "
"strange ideas came  from. Did they come  from Saruman, perhaps? Who  does "
"Karil McGlaud,4017950187997,21-12-1998
"
"be quick, it  would  take a  long time to tell.  But you  told  us not to be "
"     Sam Gamgee was sitting in one  corner near the fire,  and opposite  him "
"####-were wandering wild far down the banks of the Running River, not far from where "
cautiously he touched Frodo's knee  -- but almost the touch was a caress. For  
"hid themselves, for they were afraid of Elv ish Folk,  though few indeed ever  "
"fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Smjagol!' "
some  distance  off;  and  there  was  a  coming  and  going  about  the  Gate?  Dwarves 
minds  and memories  that was  very  similar.  They  understood one  another 
"Seward Tournay,4041591371641235,26-12-1984
"
"as he stumbled and almost fell, right on the threshold of the bridge. "
"with the Enemy, and now  make  a heavy stroke in  his cause. For this attack  "
     Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a  
"let a ploughman plough,  but choose an otter for swimming, and  for  running "
"was rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy and powerful, and there had been "
"Bilbo. And  your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did lend it to me and I'll  need "
 
"wind.  And they are not all. Where the  other four may be, I  do not know. I "
little  weather-stained)  and  a  dark-green cloak borrowed  from Dwalin. They were 
     A sudden dread and a horror  of  the chamber fell on  the  Company. `We  
to it; it came from the flotsam of Isengard.' 
"well, while you may!' "
Party. His sword he hung over  the mantelpiece. His coat of mail was arranged on 
"ahead now! I'm going to be at your tail, and I've got the rope handy.' "
"without  a  knock. Barley, he says, I'm off in  the  morning.  Will  you  do "
     Then  Gandalf  seeing the madness  that was on  him feared that he  had 
"Keary Slorach,4017959073834,13-02-1999
"
"     'Verily,'  said  Denethor. 'And in  my turn  I bore it, and so did each "
"yet  blessed and without bitterness, rode Sam, and Frodo, and Bilbo, and the "
creeping up the slope.' 
"land called Shire."" "
"never  let  them  see  the  light  again!"" He was  in  such  a  rage  that he  jumped off his "
long talk with Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all my time. He is 
"that you were a man foresighted. Yet twice blessed is help unlooked for, and  "
      
And  if we are  careful that  will be  hard to find.  But  we  must delay no 
and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly  he heard cries 
knowledge fails. Tom is not master of  Riders from the Black Land far beyond 
"     'He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering. ""Well, I see "
"""Here  it  is  at  last!""  he  called,  and  the  others  gathered  round  him  and  looked "
"     `The road  may lead  to Moria,  but how can  we  hope that it will lead "
it's all the lot together.' 
them out of mischief. See?' 
####-before  I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them come to 
"But  somehow,  just  when  the  dwarves  were  most  despairing,  Bilbo  felt  a "
not trust this slimy thing to keep any promise at a pinch. Any excuse would do for 
"hope. This  is my choice.  You  may go;  and  what  is more, I will lend you  "
"     They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at "
Bree-folk called it the Greenway. 
you've only slept for about three hours.' 
"broidered  hangings, and strewn  with skins:  and there at a small table sat "
"""O!""  said  Bilbo,  and  just  at  that  moment  he  felt  more  fared  than  he  ever "
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back  against the wall and took off the Ring. How 
"     Then  he heard  Merry  change the  note, and  up went the  Horn-cry  of "
"withstand  him,  and  no  weapon  seemed  to  bite  upon  him.  He  scattered  the "
door.  'I  need  smoke!  I have not tasted  it since the morning  before the 
     'At least by good chance we  came at the  right hour  to reward you for  
"     While his horses galloped up in rear, "
wandering deep in  dim  thickets of reed  and rush. Just to  the West of the 
"     Sam  heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. 'Master, master! "
"shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not falter.' "
and fear flowed from it like a grey vapour. 
might befall  them before they  came so  far  none knew They went openly but 
"     'That is just as well,' said Legolas. 'But nonetheless it has  suffered "
upon 
upon soft pillows; but the king's body  they covered  with a great  cloth of 
"cannot stay in The  Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long "
"here  above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below. 'Thank you,  Sam,' "
"you pass the Gates  of  Argonath and come  unmolested  to the Tindrock, what "
"dangers, still bearing the Ring.' "
"why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit  was captive there,  driven "
"Firelight came out, and a puff of steam. "
grate upon stone. 
"     'No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I  am  able to welcome you  "
     Aragorn laughed. 'Every man has something too dear to trust to another. 
"its putrid light, and the stench of it almost smote him down. Still his fury "
"     'I dare say I shall, if  we ever get so  far,'  said  Frodo  and turned "
"stretched  a wide tumbled flat of scored and  weathered rock,  cut  every now  "
     Chapter 5   The Bridge of Khazad-dym  
to a small fiery point a nd then vanished: they had turned the dark  northern 
"trumpets  the  dragon's wrath blazed to its height, till he was blind and mad with it. "
     But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea's mouth.'  
"and  looked in it, as should never have  happened. He ought  never  to  have  "
"hobbit  stumped  off  to  the  pantries.  ""And  just  bring  out  the  cold  chicken  and "
"Nedda Dey,4017950979890257,10-04-1989
"
"     'Who?  What?' shouted Frodo,  rushing  round  to  the other side of the "
himself  for matches his hand came on  the hilt of his  little sword  - the little dagger 
     But Jomer said to them: 
"something unexpected and unpleasant, and he saw that Balin was looking straight "
"Ade Garbutt,4041598837292,14-12-1985
"
the middle of the door a single star with many rays.  
think  it. Not  that  they would  care  they would only  laugh  all  the more  if you  told 
"     Gollum looked up. A  dark water was before him, and he was crawling  on "
she had  come to see that nothing she had paid for had been carried off; and 
"Brod Franzoli,4041378150074030,18-06-1986
"
under those many-eyed  walls and pass the watchful gate. And  even  if he did 
allowed to  go forward while the Sun is up;  but you won't go far. They will 
them;  a  rushing noise as  if  a wind were  rising and pouring  through the 
horrible  to  listen  to.  Bilbo  halted  and  flattened  himself  against  the  tunnel-wall. 
"glazed, yellow as a cat's, watchful  and  intent, and  the black slit of its "
"Isengard, and far more beautiful.  Yet it was in truth falling year by  year "
 
under a tree. Three of them! There's something mighty queer behind this.' He 
"     'No doubt you can,' retorted Sam, 'and I daresay  there's more truth in "
"do  now?  My  plan was  to  leave  the Shire  secretly, and  make my  way to "
"     'Rivendell!' said  Frodo. 'Very good:  I will go east, and  I will make "
"less than a week before, and that a  black horseman had come to the Hill the "
answering 
through the  mountains and the realm of Gondor with  fire and sword to bring 
"of  the  treasure upon him, he was pondering whether by the help of Dain he might "
"Virginia Mather,4503979286159,06-07-1998
"
"     He  paused, for at that moment there was a noise outside, a man's voice "
"Gandalf-and not  without reason, having a noble mind and eyes that look both "
 Son of Azog 
"all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if "
"all  that  outlandish  nonsense  at  your  age!""  So  be  put  on  an  apron,  lit  fires,  boiled "
"about forty, and  Gorbag's more than twice as large; but of course Shagrat's "
"with a cry that pierced all  other  sounds, tearing the clouds asunder,  the "
"bonds, gleamed with pale gold upon  her shoulders. Her eyes  grey as the sea "
"valley about, with decay: it seemed empty  and was  not so,  for a shapeless "
cruel.  They shivered. At  the same  moment the stirring  of the  air became 
     'But how will  they know that  we are not  Orcs?' he thought. 'I  don't  
fairest thing in your realm!' 
"troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to  help you; but I will "
perilous-not  least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn 
""
happened to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land. 
"striding  on foot: three hundreds. From  the uplands of  Morthond, the great "
"understand your purpose in  questioning for an hour one who knows the least, "
the 
and voices. He stood still as  stone.  Orc-voices. They were behind him  and 
"     The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy sky. "
ancient  walls  and   many -pillared   balusters   looming  in  the   swaying 
""
"     One moment stood she, and a spell "
####-and gave  to them all the lands about Lake N®rnen to be their own. And there 
"Brenna Masters,4041590862777,12-09-1988
"
"     All day the track of  their enemies led  straight  on, going north-west "
"     'It is  true,' said Thjoden. 'He  had rebelled against my commands, and "
"Rodrique Turk,4041597283701645,30-09-1979
"
"terrible  approach  grew  loud,  and  the  lake  rippled  red  as  fire  beneath  the  awful "
"trees  and  the  leaves  in  any  direction.  His  heart,  that  had  been  lightened  by  the "
"Maia Bernade,4041374698955269,22-04-1985
"
     My evening-rest and sleep to meet.' 
"himself. You are the fool, going on hoping and  toiling. You could have lain "
time. 
"Dragon, if you haven't forgotten where that is. Don't dawdle on the way!' "
thoroughly approved. Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have required a  
"behind  Haldir, and found that he was  in a chamber of oval  shape,  in  the "
not got it!  Why  did  you  let me keep it? Why didn't you make me  throw it  
my head is going round. There's  a party that came up the Greenway from 
than to weep at our parting.' 
"     Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by h is stout  courage. At least  "
with  food  however  heavy.  In  a  few  days  a  time  came when  there was  practically 
     `Into  the gateway!  Up  the stairs!  Quick! ' shouted Gandalf  leaping 
Frodo saw him  running away southwards along the green  hollow between 
sounded. Out of the bigger house on the right a large heavy figure  appeared 
Lothlurien had no power to enlighten the shadow of that distant height. 
"will  least  expect,  and  they  will  have  the  longer  ride  to  catch  you.  Be  off  now  as "
"their  meeting. But the white fury  of the Northmen burned the  hotter,  and "
clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point. 
running wild in this country. I'd give a lot for half a dozen taters.' 
Fountain is still withered and barren. When shall  I see a sign that it will 
"     By water clear and cool, "
""
and of the great paved space into  which all the wa ys to  Minas Tirith  ran. 
what would happen next. 
stumble through the shallow water to lie groaning on the shore. He had a famished 
"answer, and they  bore him away up the winding  road to the Citadel  and his "
and now out from the Gate came some bearing litters. Gently  they laid Jowyn 
"     'I know these fields and this gate!' he said. 'This is Bamfurlong,  old "
"in the stars. Proud and far-off as a snow-mountain, and as merry as any lass "
"wide-brimmed hat was pulled  down over his eyes. Gimli sprang up, too "
"the only path across the water and to the house beyond. We will set you right, but "
"scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain  of  it. "
""
curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood  seemed to  become 
"rubbish,  and  what was  left of his people  had  bolted  and  deserted him, "
"sit on them one by one and squash them into jelly: and Bilbo up in a bush, with his "
"The  king  looked  sternly  on  Thorin,  when  he  was  brought  before  him,  and "
"""You  are  always  foreboding  gloomy  things!""  said  the  others.  ""Anything  from "
"     He came back at last to the  stone door of the  orc-passage, and  still "
"dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas;  hall opening  out of  hall, "
"whatever  its  colour,  and  filled  some  of  their  emptied  skins  at  its  bank. As  it was "
cavern was  filled with  a great glare  and heat. Suddenly  Sam saw Gollum's 
"Cathie Olenchikov,4322684135639,15-06-1981
"
trees had stood there. They were all  gone.   And  looking with dismay up the 
"####-of his cup. 'Why,  your hair is twice as thick and curly  as when we parted; "
Orthanc-rock;  but that defeated  them.  It  is very  smooth  and hard. Some 
"Nissy Giff,4605994881860071,27-06-1986
"
     This was not at  all to the liking of  Gimli.  `The  agreement was made 
"Dominick Giorgeschi,4041373792715066,16-01-1986
"
""
"     Over the  plains  Shadowfax  was  flying,  needing  no  urging  and  no "
"blackberries were  still  only  in  flower,  and  of  course  there were  no  nuts,  nor  even "
between them.  The  wind was  shifting  again.  They  did  not start  early.  
"cries, until  he was close at  hand. As he rushed up he  saw that Frodo  was "
"Karlee Audrey,4041597372537363,09-04-1998
"
"Gollum  watched every morsel from  hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by a  "
"stone, cracked  and  splintered into  countless jagged shards, was scattered "
"     At last he  set the bowl down again. 'Ah -- ah,' he sighed. 'Hm,  hoom, "
"rock, almost a hill of stone,  like a  last outpost of  the distant mountains, or a huge "
"from the Elves, the teachers of  Men  in their  youth. For the Elves of  the "
pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one  of so  great 
""
"     'There are some Men about,' said Frodo. 'Down in the Southfarthing they  "
"came to an end, crossing a deep dike,  and climbing a short slope up  on  to "
"tell  you all  that tale, we should still  be sitting  here when  Spring had "
"that  gnaws itself in the shadows, but cannot again grow  or take shape. And "
"the  fog,  came the  memory  of the house down  under the Hill,  and  of Tom "
"Dionisio Donnelly,4041378264428007,26-03-1995
"
his way out alone. 
must go at once. It's the only way.' 
"the battle of the ships. Then I stood still, forgetting war in Middle-earth; "
darkness of  her evil will  walked through  all  the ways of  his  weariness 
"it, yes he must have. My birthday-present."" "
"Jacquie Bartle,4361685859165030,14-11-1987
"
meet come blundering by; and this an they have developed until to Men it may 
"Yes, I am afraid trolls do behave like that, even those with only one head each. "
"hardly  been  able  to breathe  at  all  (long noses  are  sometimes useful you  see),  and "
"forest-road itself, he bad heard, was overgrown and disused at the eastern end and "
"Linus Tatum,4041373291632,24-07-1995
"
"drown my grief in cold water.' He took up  a paddle, and steered towards the "
"""Can't  help  it,""  said Gandalf,  ""unless  you  like  to  go  back  and  ask  the  goblins "
"left. But his poor  little  feet had been very  squashed  in Bert's big paw,  and he had "
it has  turned out well: we are now  both rested. And  we  have a hard  road 
"fashion of their kind. Sam heard the  noise  of their harsh voices, flat and "
"Samwise. If  you seem to have stumbled, think  that it was  fated to  be so. "
     `What a fix! ' said Sam.  `That's the one place  in all the lands we've 
"     These wor ds no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.  "
"am right, tomorrow we may  actually see  the morning peeping  in. But in the "
"Cecil Clinch,4262296948070,03-07-1994
"
"he could rule all the other s.  If he recovers it, then he  will command them "
"we can now see them, and honour them. It is best to  love first what you are "
""
the Ephel D®ath and the River. 
you like. Some of them do. It's all the same to us. Gandalf told us that there was a 
"Cory Domeney,4017950601044646,09-08-1998
"
"     'Go  and  fetch Saruman,  since  you  have  become  his footman,  Grnma  "
"Gal Kornyakov,4017956932716075,30-12-1984
"
"frost that had turned  its sap to ice, and  so it stood, bitter-sweet, still "
"Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of the Golden Wood with dread. "
"crash-crack,  in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in  ruin; "
own  luck must go with you and  guide you): four miles along the Road you'll 
"""The Eagles! The Eagles!"" he shouted. ""The Eagles are coming!"" "
     Chapter 9   At the Sign of The Prancing Pony  
"face.  The gleam faded from his eyes,  and they went dim and grey,  old  and  "
their king.  Death to the Forgoil!  Death  to the Strawheads! Death  to  the  
"leading  the  black  fleet  from  Pelargir,  and  Merry was riding with  the "
every tree. 
"gave way to a look of relief and a laugh. 'Well, that's that,' he said.  'Now "
"Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it, "
"Courtenay Challoner,4041596494522329,14-08-1975
"
"     Sam was  standing by the  pony, sucking  his teeth, and staring moodily "
"positively ill-gotten), is, as every  one  knows, any one's for  the  finding "
"     for your King shall come again, "
looks just the same as ever it did.' 
"doubt  you'll be glad  of your beds too. Hey, Nob!' he called, going to  the "
"head was going  queer. He first  saw one with the corner of his  left eye, a  "
"Ty Bert,4041375214185844,22-01-1983
"
heavens seemed  to be round  him. He spoke at  last out  of his wonder and a  
"he  demanded. 'You  never  mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You  "
that that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the 
"he spoke to the guard, and Pippin gazing at him saw how closely he resembled "
####-It  had  not  been  a-bit too soon. Only a minute or two after Balin's lid had been 
time. 
"     'I'm  going  back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr.  Frodo,' he "
"his eyes, `we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more "
small concern to  him: his  mind was busy with the pursuit of the  Ring. But 
"Barazinbar, the  Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertine and "
"     'At dawn three  days ago,  lord,' he  said. 'Shadowfax came like a wind "
"iron, the hobbits did not guess: Frodo gave no thought to it. Sam's mind was "
"Archaimbaud Insworth,4859717290491490,19-11-1990
"
"     'My heart's  right  down  in my  toes, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam.  'But  we "
"     She danced, and at her feet was strewn  "
"     ` ""Gandalf! "" he cried.  ""I was seeking you. But I  am  a  stranger  in "
"Alan Shirland,4041371582207807,12-11-1993
"
Broken!' he said. 
     'Now  straight on!'  shouted Ugl®k. 'West  and a  little  north. Follow 
"Gandalf. 'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.' "
Sam. `But you're in the top of that tower you and me saw from away  down  by 
"cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm. "
"Della Bausor,4041598852827571,26-02-2000
"
"by  the  bridle. The  elves  had  brought  bright  lanterns  to  the  shore,  and  they  sang  a "
"     '""Hoom! Gandalf!"" said Treebeard.  ""I  am  glad  you have come. Wood and "
"""What!  a  furrier,  a  man  that  calls  rabbits  conies,  when  he  doesn't  turn  their "
Every now and  then the waters  found their  way down  into  some  shaft  or  
"the  sight even  of Legolas, into the wide  flats and green haze of Lebennin "
"them to  the  river -bank,  where there was a broad wooden  landing-stage.  A "
"of all  that race, the people of the Rose, that are  so beautiful to me. And "
"And  so  they  did.  With  sacks  in  their  hands,  that  they  used  for  carrying  off "
the third day after the fall of Smaug. 
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the top his 
"Genna Gedling,4041372887788764,24-05-1984
"
"belly's worth, or yours, to break 'em. Any trespasser found by the  guard is "
     and cold be sleep under stone: 
from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another draught.  
They  were  burning  bright  and  blue.  Just  then  there  came  a  burst  of  song  like 
"her, they talked  together, and  she heard  of  all that  had  passed  since "
"will keep that dead secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of "
"beginning to creep over him again, he  was aware that  the  wind had  indeed  "
rush of  their beating wings  smote  them  to  the  floor or drove  them  far  away;  their 
Then he took the fish out of his mouth and stood up. 
     There  was  a sharp  hiss.  Presently  out of  the darkness Gollum came 
off to.  Do you realize  that  this  is the  very  path  that  goes  through 
"drowsy, when Dori, whose turn it was to watch first, said in a loud whisper: "
"wood, it is said.' "
You may remember saying that I might choose my own fourteenth share? Perhaps 
"deep  thicket  of  mallorn-trees,  and passed  on,  winding through  rolling "
"after file passed, and the tell-tale torchlight was  already some way ahead. "
"would say. Business was  not even fair, it was downright bad.  'No one comes "
####-began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in Rohan.' 
"     o galadhremmin ennorath, "
about Gandalf.' 
"would all stay  to supper. Then  the bell rang again  louder  than ever, and he had  to "
"thought: 'encumber a rider, and hope at best to stay in my  seat and  not be "
"     Gollum dropped the fish from his hand. `Don't want fish,' he said. "
"impervious; air filtered through, hut not a  glimmer of any light. Once more "
     Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground. 
"Celerdain, the Lampwrights' Street. You will find him  there with other lads "
"posture  of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take  a morsel in the grey  light, "
"     'What then would  you have,' said Gandalf, 'if your will could have its "
"     'I do not  know, but it seems clear  to me that this is  what happened. "
to  the orc-hold. 'No good wearing my nose out  on  stones any more. There's 
Thjoden's ears! He is  wroth.  For  Gandalf took  the  horse  that is called 
"to  be  angry  any  longer  at  his  misfortunes,  and  was  even  beginning  to  think  of "
also fallen. Yet I  had caught no  hint of anything wrong in his voice or in 
     What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away.'  
them in the empty spaces of the night. 
deathlike than his son's.  
"     'No, and will not rise  today,  Master Holbytla. Nor  ever  again,  one "
"     'It's the  job that's never started as takes longest  to finish, as  my "
####-But against the Power that now arises there is no victory. To this City only 
"two near my  skin, as precious as  Rings  to  me.  Here's one: my old wooden "
"felt a curious suspense, but  not fear. 'Please.' he said, 'who are you? And "
"Wildon Dodshun,4041594503724,27-01-1979
"
"Eugene Petteford,4328420605090,08-10-1994
"
     But  Ioreth  was  not  permitted  to  continue the instruction  of  her  
time yet: a couple of  days very likely. So I  have brought you a companion.  
"Elizabeth Hostan,4348893767383,05-02-1994
"
They 
"Car Chimenti,4041591497250,13-10-1998
"
great spear-head thrust  deep  into the northern glen; but its  southern end 
"peace,  when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about "
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship. 
night. 
"raced  through his mind, even as he watched  the enemy  come charging to the "
"     'I am,' said Pippin. "
"     'And  he  now  requires  it  of  you again,' said  Thjoden. 'Does  that "
"grievance. Now I  loved him dearly, and would gladly avenge his death, yet I "
midnight when he  clambered up  the  rope  again  –  it was  still where he had  left  it. 
down  from  the  hills  and  discovered  us.  They  yelled  with  delight  and  sang  songs 
     'The Enemy  still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to 
eagle told me.' 
"took a step towards them, and even in the gloom he recognized the devices on "
Strider's arm. 
speech and merriment!' 
"sunlight, were fluttered by the wind. "
cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and  caught a gleam of white foam among 
"more  tales,  tales of  long ago, and  tales  . of new  things, and  tales of no  time at all, "
     'l wish we could get away! ' said Merry. 
branch. 
Pippin. 'We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but   we 
"Rurik Aspel,4041374797097989,19-07-1995
"
all wrong.' 
"get away. But I can't touch the knots, and I can't bite them.' "
"dark, holding his breath. "
"look on  the halls of Durin, whatever may  wait  there-if  you can  find the "
"his face. 'Did  he indeed? It is news to  me, yet  it does not  surprise me. "
until he woke with a start. 
"ridge, and the horns of rock darkling  in  the sky on either side.  A  short "
danger  to all that live near  me.  I cannot  keep the Ring and stay here. I 
Let me pass!' 
""
every room  and found no living thing save rats and  mice. 'Shall we turn on 
 
"light,  as  of  fire  or  lantern,  but  a  pale  out-of-doors  sort of  light. Then Bilbo began "
"difficult, not so quick; but  better, if  we  don't want  Him to see. Follow "
"     'But he may have other things to cast,' said Gimli. 'If that is the end "
Mithrandir. Men are flying from the walls and leaving them unmanned.' 
"steeped. The pungent fragrance filled  the dell, and all  those who  stooped "
"     'All except one thing,' said  Aragorn: 'leaf  from the Southfarthing in "
far  away to the dark dales  of  Fangorn.  Thus they were  revenged upon the 
"Kaylyn Carmo,4017950747766,06-03-1977
"
seen. One hundred  and forty-four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless.  
####-merit them.' 
"said  to Gandalf.  'Much of more import,  it  may seem,  and yet to  me less "
"were hung upon  the  walls,  and over their  wide spaces  marched figures of "
"Rosalinde Blandamore,4281442910388,16-06-1998
"
stars. 
"still clawing at the cracks. A notched and broken sword lay by him, as if he "
"encamped upon it, three miles west of Amon Don, and some strength of men "
Saruman was shown that the power  of his voice was waning. He cannot be 
"     'I hope so,' said Frodo and sighed. 'The very last stroke. But to think  "
through Moria? ' said Aragorn darkly. 
"     'Well, you  know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking "
bodyguards  of  Bolg.  But  he  could  not  pierce  their  ranks.  Already  behind  him 
well-tended fields and meadows: there were  hedges  and gates  and dikes for 
there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders  have never  
""
"     'But I  shall die,' said Aragorn. 'For  I  am a mortal man, and  though "
"     'And I don't wish to enter it even once,' said Pippin. "
"Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required, I think. "
"way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.' "
"Are  the  spiders your  tame beasts or your pets,  if killing  them makes you  angry?"" "
"accident,  or  a  last  trick  of  the  ring  before  it  took  a  new master,  it was  not  on  his "
"     She smiled  on him and said: 'Then it was kindly done, lord, to ride so "
said Gandalf. 
doubts now.' 
"     They slopped suddenly  and  stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening. "
"""But  they  cannot  reach  the  Mountain  unmarked,""  said  Róac,  ""and  I  fear  lest "
glow  flow through  him.  The pain in his legs and ankles vanished. He could 
 
"Arny Daughtrey,4041379010812,10-10-1990
"
"     With  that the king stood up, and they all rose.  'Go  now each to your "
hall. For you are needed. The  light of And®ril must now be uncovered in the 
but shrill and harsh across the marsh  
     At the  foot of the  stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 'I will go 
"####-journey  under cover  of night as often as  they could,  until they were far "
"who stood by that a keen wind blew through the window, and it bore no scent, "
"have not slept in such a bed as this, since I rode from Dunharrow, nor eaten "
"the willow-lands, when the River was younger too, gollum, gollum.' He  began "
comprehending.  `Why  yes! Why had  I forgotten it? A  light when all  other 
     'Alas!'  said Jomer. 'I will not say that she  is the fairest lady that 
with distaste. 
"gathering on  his eastern borders.  If we make no answer, the Enemy may move "
"Lucais Studman,4041377410907,05-07-1984
"
"Louie Kincaid,4041595053808756,18-09-1986
"
     Not too  soon came  their  aid to  the Rohirrim; for fortune had turned 
     And those were the  words that Elendil spoke when he came up out of the 
"Gandalf  and  Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting "
     The cow and the horses stood on their heads; 
Elendil's son of N®menor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell 
"unchallenged,  and  still Thjoden gave  no signal. At last  he  halted  once "
accounts of the event at the same time. 
"the land falls into the great vales, sometimes suddenly and sheer, sometimes "
""
"Desi Posner,4446144314680,13-09-1993
"
"were  still  some  people who  had  both  elves  and  heroes  of  the North  for ancestors, "
"And it's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.' "
and behind the wizard he passed the tall silent door -wardens and entered the 
such  a crowd already in the house  tonight  as there  hasn't been for  long 
"safe as you can  be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or  the Ring is "
"     'Oh,' stammered  Pippin, 'he was a  man who went  about with us. I think  "
"mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled "
"     'Ah, but you had not  got me with you then,' laughed Strider. 'My cuts,  "
anything about it.' 
"####-men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low again. The winged "
"your new  master. or tried to do so. When his eye turns  hither,  it will be "
"if you turn  over a new leaf, and keep it turned, I'll cook you  some taters "
"""They  are  the best  I  am  likely  to get  in  this beastly place,"" he muttered,  as he "
"Doralyn Giorgio,4041595147092219,25-03-1988
"
"they  were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from  the dungeons of Sauron, "
less valiant because they are unpraised.' 
     Sam nodded silently. He took his master's hand and bent over it. He did 
"Then  they  wanted  to  know  all  about  his  adventures  after  they  had  lost  him, "
"made  little  boats  of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute,  "
a fire within.  'Do not tempt me! For I do not  wish to become like the  Dark 
"Take  care  of  yourself!  Look out  for  me, especially at  unlikely times!  "
drear light of  Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night; and  Sam 
The host  was bivouacked in  the  pine-woods that  clustered about  Eilenach  
"before them. They now saw that  they had, in  fact, turned too much  to  the "
"     'We're not allowed to,' said Robin. "
"tried to take them into the forest."" "
"     'There's a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,' said a  "
"country, was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on "
"Vince Orth,4041377381074447,06-03-1979
"
"wailing  cry  and swerved away; and with  that the  four others wavered, and "
grass. 
"Shaine Schaffel,4017951681459258,09-06-1990
"
"and  no  echo  of  a  song.  Sorrow  seemed  to  be  in  the  air.  ""Victory  after  all,  I "
     or after thunder golden showers 
"     O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay! "
"Giacinta Scouler,4017950597265726,13-03-1979
"
"Pippin,  there  is no  t ime to instruct  you now in  the history of  Gondor; "
to the hilt of his small sword. 
near the mark?' 
"Jennica Harragin,4041590300513,10-08-1975
"
their Stewards.  
"Torre Ruste,4041598740389,01-06-1978
"
"     'You'll be welcome when you come,' said Maggot. 'But now I've a notion. "
said Frodo. 
inside too. You  wish to come there? Then you must be  quick. But gorgyn and 
under him. 
trail again. Perhaps  they  were waiting  to  make  some ambush in  a narrow 
""
"     'You  know,  then, what this thing is? '  said Faramir.  `Come, now you  "
     At length they made up their minds  to go on again. The path  that  had 
out.   'Elendil!'  he cried. 'I  am  Aragorn son  of Arathorn and  am  called 
"When  they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange  forgotten "
either go through or give up your quest. And I am not going to allow you to back 
pops  up again. He was in and out  pretty  often last spring; but I  haven't  
"Cynde Leades,4748032713854828,23-07-1979
"
"knew a good deal more about you, and your business.' "
"     `And so should I,'  said Gimli. 'We, of course, were only sent  to help "
"""Half  a  minute!""  said  Dori,  who  was  at  the  back  next  to  Bilbo,  and  a  decent "
"     He  could not see  them,  but he  knew  that  all  round  him were  the "
     red fell the dew in Rammas Echor. 
"you have kept at it, I must say.' "
"Gandalf. He's not so close as he used to be,  though he laughs now more than "
used  to  seeing  things  he  could  catch  glimpses  of  them whisking  off  the  path  and 
"     'Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father, from "
"breakfast."" "
they should just then: three quarters of the people of the town had at least escaped 
"within, there  was no  need. Many  coiling  arms seized the  doors on either  "
care greatly  about  their  peril. Frodo's head  was  bowed; his burden  was 
"back, a matter of  sixty  years  ago,  when I was a  lad. I'd  not long come "
     'Is Saruman the  master  or the Great Eye?'  said the  evil  voice. 'We 
"fire by many devious paths that had been  left between  them. On  they came, "
     And one by one with sighing sound  
long  White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew  that  the 
"     `There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,' said Faramir. "
good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer  
"bow. We did not bring them to rest against your wall, Lord  of the Mark. And "
doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is  known  
"last  choice, it  is clear to  me that I  cannot leave Frodo. I would choose "
"the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them. "
"Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less "
"many days  he will have his eye turned this way and that, away  from his own "
"the other  side. One of  the others must keep hold of  the hook we used  at  first,  and "
"so, we must be wary.' "
"Elnora Tremoille,4629901916770912,23-03-1983
"
"Kenn Pallin,4041374333351643,07-10-1979
"
known  that  something  dreadful  would  happen  to  me  in  the  end.  I  don't  think  I 
said Gimli. 'Seldom will  Orcs journey in the open under the sun.  yet these 
"River, and he turned towards the City that was now less than a mile distant. "
"frightfully  tree-ish.  You  can't imagine animals  living here  at all,  or "
"desire  it, then men will be slain. But  if I am a murderer on that account, "
"the  North,  both  west  from  here  and  east,  and  tell  them  of  our  plight.  But  go "
"high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth. "
"will not give you  counsel, saying do this,  or do that. For not in doing or  "
far off in the night. the sound of horses whinnying and  neighing. Then  all 
the Causeway Forts. At  once he went  to Denethor.  The Lord of the City sat 
####- 
that  Frodo  had  worn  wrapped  in  his tattered garments. A blackness came  
"     'Riders!' cried Aragorn, springing to  his feet.  'Many riders on swift "
of the Shire in which he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round 
in the midst of a cry by  an arrow through the heart;  and then his face went 
"hour was  over and Denethor again rang  the gong, Pippin felt worn out.  'It "
"     'Maybe,' said the Elf; 'but a heavy boot might leave no print here: the "
"     'That'll do to go on with,' said the Shirriff-leader. "
still  echoing in his  mind.  He wondered if  he would ever  again  have the 
####-At that Thorin shut his mouth and would not say another word. 
who was coming  to Minas Tirith;  and that  he had a famous sword. Men think  
communities. Most of their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been 
"has  been wrought  by those who wield the Three will turn  to their undoing,  "
the cake with relish. 
to 
"among the horses, fighting with the guards.  "
women 
"climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky. "
"turned  and  ran  blindly  back  up  the  dark  passage  down  which  he  had  come, "
"With what strength he had he hewed  at the crawling  arm near the wrist, and "
"Perren Caller,4041377628730,25-01-1982
"
"Herculie Kovacs,4017951807395,07-07-1995
"
"do not come, Elrond will advise you. "
"After  some  while  Bilbo  became  impatient.  ""Well,  what  is  it?""  he  said.  ""The "
either  side of the white  breast beneath its curving neck. Its  beak  shone 
as he listened Pippin became aware that he himself was being discussed. 
"horribly quiet.  The torch,  that was already burning  low  when he arrived, "
"that Frodo  would  follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave  in. 'It is not "
"ever.  A  woodland  king  was  there  with  a  crown  of  leaves,  and  there  was  a merry "
"walls, but its distant end was lost in gloom. Many doors  and openings could "
"Kym Dowda,4041597011605209,09-01-1992
"
he has sent forth.' 
come within the caves. What hope they may have then I  do not know.' 
"cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards down "
who 
dead  branches  and  bracken.  Soon  they  had  a  ring  of  smoke  and  flame  all  round 
Orcs were roving in  the hills  and  woods along the  roadside. The king and  
"without reason,  for  it  was indeed ancient,  a survivor  of vast forgotten "
"     As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of "
new 
something.' 
"the strength to  break a siege of many powers, the Lord Denethor bids me say "
They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked out 
been built  for  the use  of troops  sent in  haste  through  the  waterless 
At the head of  the glen a torrent flowed  like a white lace over an endless 
"####-wine, had won Sam's respect and quieted his suspicions. "
"Adolphe Terzi,4841036409886123,13-12-1993
"
"     Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses; "
"     'We didn't discuss it,' said Frodo with his mouth full. "
"steps  from the wide yard stood  Mrs. Cotton and Rosie, and Nibs in front of "
ruffians smoked  out a band of rebels that  he  led from their hidings up in 
""
"you back across so wide a sea?' he mocked. 'It will be a grey ship, and full "
"     `However,  I wrote a message  to Frodo,  and trusted  to  my friend the "
"Janka Engelbrecht,4148896795354436,21-02-2001
"
the noise  of wind and of ga lloping  hoofs.  The wind  seemed to be  curling  
####-Foreword 
     After the celebration  of  Bilbo's birthday  the four hobbits stayed in 
"their parched  mouths. Frodo and Sam  plodded on. The light,  though no more "
"like to me. I hope you will find it useful."" "
words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said 
"amazement while  the old  hobbit, actually not  at all displeased, recounted "
"ancient tree. Sam beside  him was more uneasy: he woke many times, but there "
"     'Perhaps  he also thought that you were  Saruman,' said Gimli. 'But you  "
"Wilt Moger,4041599011707,09-11-1979
"
"Northrup Eytel,4041374752830564,12-03-1975
"
"aloud the wizard's name, and then he saw that  the figure was clothed not in "
suspicion an wondered why he had never blocked it up. Of late he had half fancied 
uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to  head of Stairs. 
"Leslie Merry,4017955328075,19-11-1983
"
"Tom's going to ride. Hey! he's coming with you, just to set you on the road; "
"towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock, you'll see it. "
swiftly. So Saruman will come to  the last pinch of the vice that he has put 
     'I remember it was  long ago --  in the time of  the war between Sauron 
"     'As for  Bilbo,' said Gandalf, 'he is waiting for the same day, and  he "
"know nothing about  jools.  Mr. Bilbo is free with  his money, and there seems "
"     'And no hope at all, if they  come at the other  door  as  well,'  said "
"`Hungry again already?' thought Sam. `Well, now for it again!' "
"young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked "
""
"Jacquelyn Feare,4017955040612630,14-11-1999
"
"     Things  would have gone  ill with  Sam, if he had been alone. But Frodo "
They went without  lights and took it  slowly. After  a mile or two the lane 
history of Middle-earth and Over -heaven and of  the Sundering Seas ' laughed 
"####-     Leading the line there came walking a big thick -limbed horse, and on it "
withdrawn because you are overmatched?' 
     'Speak not words  of omen!' said the k ing. 'For there may be more roads 
"leisure now to walk among  them: they have voices, and  in time I might come "
"Sullivan Gulberg,4041597742774613,30-05-1995
"
Come!  ' 
attempted to  take their leading companies in an ambush; and that was in the 
     'Kingship?' said Pippin amazed. 
"Moon's the same in the Shire  and  in  Wilderland, or  it  ought  to be. But "
"     The bow  and arrow fell from Legolas' hands, and his arms hung loose at "
"     `We were all at  fault,' said Elrond, `and but  for your vigilance  the "
"of  the Dark Lord  you will set up  a  Queen. And I shall  not  be dark, but "
"     `I do  not  know what you mean by  that,' answered  the  leader  of the "
"Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair  of boots many sizes larger than "
     It was late  in the night  when at  length  they reached  firmer ground 
back  at any  minute.  If  they  ca tch me here. I  shall have  to argue  and 
"####-     `Also,' said Haldir, `they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of "
"looking into. If I think it necessary after all  for you to get off at once, "
"     'I  do  not  know  which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the "
news  that came yestereve  out of Lebennin. There is a great  fleet  drawing 
"darkest.  Go on!  Go on,  White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf!' he shouted wildly, "
light helm might be found to fit him; but  we have no   mail or sword for one 
 
was impenetrable. 
"him of his treasure re-made; the winds of fortune turning in our favour, and "
"trust  to Aragorn.  But I  hoped  to draw  some  of them  off, and yet reach "
"northwards. Then  their hearts rose,  for it seemed plain that they had come "
"swung  themselves  into  lower  branches,  some  (like  the  little  hobbit)  got  behind  a "
things.  Even Sauron  knows them not. They  are  older  than  he. Now I have 
"wind,  but  it  had  a  sad  sound.  A  few  leaves  came  rustling  down  to  remind  them "
towards the citadel. 
were 
"time after that, searching the flotsam, and rummaging about. We found two or  "
lady so fair and brave that cannot be returned Sorrow and pity have followed 
"     of Valinor, and Eldamar "
"been under these  trees, and now she  has  run  out  again; or  else she has "
bitter light. 
When 
"Rosalie Hampshire,4017950011577,01-07-1997
"
swords. Though we should still have enough  to do without them: the world is 
"you something, if they will let me.' "
"before the water boils,' said Sam. "
"     'Well, here  we are and all ready,'  said  Merry;  `but  where  are the "
his  back.  Their  beards  were  forked  and  plaited  and  thrust  into  their  belts.  Their 
"was the  voice  of their old friend  and guide. 'Get  up, my  good Gimli! No "
"What is Gandalf up  to? And these -- burbrum,' he made a deep rumbling noise "
""
'You are not alone. Let us take  this wood that is set ready for the fire as 
heard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind is in the South the 
 
"seemed small need for watching in the days of our prosperity, and the guards were "
brought out of the ruin of N®menor and there  set by Isildur at his landing . 
"you  do  not need,  but there  are helms and coats  of mail of cunning work, "
"Eimile Twentyman,4562104183299207,11-11-1984
"
"their chief. A great lord is that, and a  healer;  and it is a thing passing "
####-the Great River before the world was grey. 
"looking now south-west across the north  plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the "
"assault. As well as we could guess, there  are  few left  upon the out-wall, "
"Vinson Cirlos,4017957356264,08-11-1977
"
sprang forward with a loud cry. 
"thrusting the boat away from the bank, and then toppled back into the dark water, "
judged. 
"chilly, and he wrapped  his cloak about him.   The  moon was shining cold and "
passed through them. At a  great height above the ground he came to  a  wide 
"Errick Shadfourth,4041379291321,27-03-1996
"
Now  certainly  Bilbo  was  in  what  is  called  a  tight  place.  But  you  must 
"Then they  wrapped themselves warmly,  not only  in  the fur-cloaks  of  the "
"fires  burning  on  the  ground;  and  there  was  a  great  feast  going  on,  going  on  for "
"they were aware  of two small figures  lying on it at their ease, grey-clad, "
"while there is yet time!"" "
"not lie. See, Thjoden, here is a snake! With  safety you cannot take it with "
"Smjagol  saved for  you,  poor  hungry  Smjagol! What for? What  for,  silly "
There  in  the  king's  dungeon  poor  Thorin  lay;  and  after  he  had  got  over  his 
"present,  then  goblinses  will  get  it,  gollum!  They'll  find  it,  they'll  find  out what  it "
     What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea? 
"Charita Anelay,4017953580644,21-02-1995
"
"gone well  so far, and the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are "
"unfurled  upon the topmost tower,  and  the reign of King Elessar began,  of "
was  awaiting  the pronouncement of some doom that he had long  foreseen  and 
"     As  the second day  of their riding drew on, the  heaviness in the  air "
"sound, a  strange  cold  thrill; and yet  it was not  fear or terror that he "
"They  very  seldom  did,  for  they  had  a  feeling  that  something  unpleasant  was "
"with a  spell, the Rider halted suddenly, right  before the  entrance of the "
lifted them up. 
"was  rolled back, and he beheld white  shores and beyond  them  a far  green "
"Faint echoes ran round the unseen hall, but there was no answer. Bilbo got up, "
carven by giants out of the bones of the earth. 
"     `Where am  I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the  ceiling. 'In "
miles  about  them.  The trough  between the  mountains  and  the Morgai had 
time?  ' 
so flummoxed. So Thorin went on: 
"through Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face. "
"frail and  fleeting  as little  leaves,  under  the  enduring  shadow of the "
treachery. Down with Saruman!' 
""
"Xylina Blackbrough,4017955814329395,24-09-2001
"
"the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even  now,  "
"entirely different),  and much further back. The country in which I lived in "
"behind as scouts near the roa d, came in latest. All  the Southrons  had been "
"####-always now begin upon  the twenty -fifth  of March when Sauron fell, and when "
the most beggar-like of the four!' 
"of need, but set beyond his grasp, save by a victory so  final that what then "
"own master and no wizard's pupil. But if doom denies this to me, then I will "
defeated. A power was there that we have not felt before. 
""
Thus he brought me back at last to the secret  ways of Khazad-dym: too  well 
"""Quite  so,""  said  Bilbo.  ""I  see  your  point  of  view.  At  the  same  time  winter  is "
"     where shining fall the countless years, "
"staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later,  if  you  "
"sat a man of  wide  shoulders and  huge girth, but old and grey-bearded, yet "
"knowledge, but  full  of surprises.  Soft as  butter  they  can be,  and yet "
the bank. There seemed to be less fog on the further side. 
"Culver Caraher,4041379692528,28-12-1984
"
"Legolas. He stood under the  eaves of the forest, stooping forward, as if he "
"Alard Takle,4017959788332,30-01-1977
"
the 
     Then Aragorn took the crown and held it up and said: 
"Rivendell, they  say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the D®nedain ride "
     On a seat cut  in  the  stone beside  a turn in the path they came upon 
quarriers  and  builders  of  old  had  used;  and  at  such  work  the  dwarves  were  still 
 
"he was  doing, his hand was groping  in his pocket. But at that moment there "
Much loss and sorrow has befallen us.' 
came; he could do no more. Dream and waking mingled uneasily. He saw  
"yet. 'Why, it might have  been put there a -purpose!' he said to himself. 'If "
     Gimli ground his  teeth. 'This  is a bitter end to our  hope and to all 
"Sherri Buttrey,4041594196624105,26-11-1990
"
     'He is  steering a straight course now for  the halls of Thjoden  under  
"for help  in  the  far distance, all noise at  last died  right away, and he was  left alone "
"were being headed off,  and were simply following a course chosen for them - "
"could  hear  even  the  flap  of  the  goblin  feet,  many  many  feet which  seemed  only "
"lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry  it? Anyway I must rest before "
""
"Melina Smalles,4017958191330523,09-10-1985
"
grass.  On  it roughly  cut  and  now  much weathered  could  still be  seen 
"could  be  used  for  the  escape  of  his  friends,  and  at  last  he  had  the  desperate "
and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again. 
"     The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did  not themselves travel much; and the "
"it's got in its pocketses. It knows. It knows a way in, it must know a way out, yes. "
"Westmarch.1  It was in origin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with  him "
have  a  look  round.  The  only  way  is  to  choose  the  tallest  tree  that  overhangs  the 
the sullen clouds. The earth groaned; and out of the city there came  a cry. 
"coming on, darkness unescapable. I often dream of it.' "
"his own fate,  and even his masters, ceased to trouble him. He crawled  back  "
""
"and light the night for our delight, "
done. This shall surely be-unless you accept my Lord's terms.' 
That thought has long been  growing in our hearts;  and that is  why we  are 
     If ever you'd met me 
"good, I'll warrant! Spying on the private business of my people, I guess! Thieves, I "
"came  running  in,  while  the  goblin-drivers  whooped  and  cracked  their  whips "
But  there  is  a great draught in  the  chimney:  it seems  to wind away up 
####-Chapter 2
"end, but clouds were now over moon and star, and they  knew of the coming of "
"can now lie hid and sheltered for a while, and can see much without being seen."" "
     
word  of Elrond. If that  was worth a journey of a hundred  and ten days  to 
"""We  did  not  mean  to.  They  surprised  us  at  night  in  a  pass  which  we  had  to "
"     This  tale grew in the telling, until it became  a history of the Great "
"path were pale , as if seen through  a mist, but still at a distance he heard "
elvish country  they were made not even Legolas knew; but the wood was 
"Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed, "
glint of frosty stars. 
"mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing "
trees  grew.  The  moon  was  up  and  was  shining  into  the  clearing.  Somehow  it 
"     'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That  is, if the  track goes on so far, and "
"Sterne Kidman,4997639729852824,29-12-1988
"
The heart is bold that looks on gold; 
"     'Bad business,'  said Gorbag.  `See  here  -- our Silent  Watchers were "
"is mor e strengthening than any food made  by Men, and  it  is more  pleasant  "
"Tamera Bodega,4539666857951,28-11-1976
"
You  have  only a  choice  of  evils;  and prudence  would  counsel  you  to 
Men  of  Minas Tirith  will never be overcome. And  now they  have the  Lord 
"     Gandalf put his hand on Pippin's head. 'There never was much  hope,' he "
"fire, and a move again  by night, had been broken to him, as soon as he woke "
mountain's heart. 
     `You have not spoken of this before.' 
"he  was not,  as  were most of the  others, troubled by the mere darkness in "
"if you like.  There is  a well of  good water, if you  need refreshing, away "
behaved 
"away. `You know that, or  you guess  well enough, Smjagol,' he said. quietly "
"""We  are  met  to  discuss  our  plans,  our  ways,  means,  policy  and  devices.  We "
     'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do 
captivity  had healed and their  vigour had returned. They came at length to 
"feared. I wondered often how Gollum came  by a Great Ring, as plainly it was "
"truly. Truly, I say and mean,' he added with a glance at Sam, 'for twice now "
"     `Yes, we must  rest,' said Frodo. 'Let us find some corner out  of  the "
"Harriet Worsnup,4041598890797661,02-06-1997
"
"hand  they could  see the southward road,  now  bearing away  from the black "
"see it  from the hill-top, the Road  must lie that way, and it  could not be "
"Anita Abramin,4041596231357,22-04-1979
"
he is in Rohan now.' 
his  claws  and  flew  away  with  him  into  the  night  leaving Bilbo  all  alone. He  had 
""
"the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!' he said, cocking an "
"     None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master: "
"out. No tidings  had  yet come, and all hearts  were darkened. The  weather, "
setting  out on the Quest  of  Mount Doom. On him  alone is any charge laid: 
"Latrena Shiliton,4017956054236746,20-02-1999
"
"     For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars -- we go to war! "
not guess. Beware of his voice!' 
"Rohan, he would remember Aragorn and the title that he claimed. That is what "
"beyond hope, gleamed upon Mindolluin in the morning. "
sayings that men have mostly never heard or have forgotten long ago. 
"Merrili Shillabear,4041371456138914,21-05-1982
"
"in the Shire. But all  such places will soon  become islands under siege, if "
into  the night beneath  the moon. As  the  light faded Bilbo  thought he saw away  to 
"the filth! ' he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.  "
     Sam soon became aware that  the Captain was not satisfied  with Frodo's 
"climbed down with  them. At the  bottom  they  stepped on to  grass, and the "
we may still escape. After me!  ' 
the  Elvenking  rode  forth  the  news  had  passed west  right  to  the  pinewoods  of  the 
####-away. We are the fighting  Uruk-hai! We slew the  great warrior. We took the 
"cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains "
"####-     `I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,' said Frodo. "
"do what  Sharkey says. Because if a  Boss  gives trouble, we can change him. "
"Charles Salterne,4041598458661184,24-11-1988
"
""
"cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of  the hobbits Pippin proved the "
"suffered cruelly, and been in dire peril, going without hope towards torment  "
"is no time for long searching,' said Frodo. "
leaf and bloom of blinding flame. The fire leapt  from tree-top to tree-top. 
"Hieronymus Wartonby,4041377332523,27-04-1997
"
you know. Run now! Hope is in speed!' 
"Karyn Cossell,4041378063531,14-01-1981
"
Marish -I know the land  in these parts. And if you are worrying about Black 
""
"if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.' "
"have any fears. He curled  up and  went quickly to sleep, quite unconcerned. "
"hill, and they came again  to  the great  gate hung with  lamps, and to  the "
     He paused  and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left was tall 
"black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are  far from ripe,  "
     Autumn was well under  way  before  Frodo began to worry  about Gandalf 
"Kim Scawton,4312503248846,25-03-1988
"
"Out into the whispering breeze, "
"good  cook, even by  hobbit  reckoning,  and he had  done a good deal of the "
come 
slept. almost as soon as he had spoken the words. Gollum seemed no longer to 
"####-many  wild  and wary  things and I can usually avoid being  seen, if I wish. "
"last throw. We must call out his hidden strength, so that he shall empty his "
snow.' 
known as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the lesser pass-words. Send word 
"beyond, they went into hiding again and slept a little, turn by turn. In his "
""
"message and what it means under its fair cloak."" "
he did not know:  
"and the evening  was filled with a  faint scent  of trees and flowers, as if "
footsteps  for  hours  and  hours  after  we  have  passed. We  must  be  miles  on  before 
"     The  old man laid  the  sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to "
"     As Frodo stood upon  the threshold, Elrond  wished him  a fair journey, "
into the valley below.  
"shadow of a tree, looking out southwards and  westwards, with his head posed "
""
""
his head. He let it fall with a thud. 
"     'But  the  Ring was  lost. It fell  into  the Great  River, Anduin,  and "
strained  their  friendship;  but  the  wizard seemed  to  think  the  truth 
to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.' 
"     Nose like a snake, "
"Bernette Cuff,4041374480010,10-04-1991
"
"in this land,  but  I have  seldom  heard of a hobbit  sleeping out of doors "
"Melba Moulds,4017950831131,05-09-1982
"
you. What more do you want to know?' 
"farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such  a morning: cool, "
hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.' 
shapes of the explorers appeared again. 
"stood aghast. A mist seemed  to  clear from his eyes, and  he passed a  hand "
"seemed, but  dim, as if  it were but an echo in the mind. A boding of ill we "
"Kings of Gondor, if you will. Or if you desire it, we will come to Rohan and "
     On this occasion the presents were unusually  good. The hobbit-children 
"of water, we've got to eat less, Mr.  Frodo,  or else move a bit quicker, at "
"Nathanael Dawltrey,4017957617351378,01-09-1980
"
"and come behind, if they dared, when the Grey Host had passed. "
"floor,  shivering.  'We  doesn't  know  and we  doesn't want  to  know,'  he  "
bitter end. But he had stuck to his master all the way; that was what he had 
 
a  great  wizardry  it seemed to  them that their own ships should be filled 
"old-fashioned  countrified house, as much like a hobbit -hole as possible: it "
slope had been steep and rocky. 
""
     `On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon this 
comfortable  before  the  ghastly  head  of  Smaug  was  thrust  against  the  opening 
"Anjela Whitlow,4041377070400283,01-08-1994
"
""
"     Gollum withdrew grumbling,  and  crawled  into  the  fern.  Sam  busied "
"Emili Mostin,4041597636786,12-08-1997
"
"""What about guards?"" they asked. ""Weren't there any?"" "
"milk, cheese,  and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for  "
cave  that  ran  into  the  side  of  a  steep  slope  covered  with  trees.  There  the  great 
once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under  
"up their  minds  about. Still, it is no use denying, we shall be here a long "
"and clean. The air was cool and  soft, as if it were  early spring, yet they "
"brave death in battle. Look at me, Jowyn!' "
""
angry  words  the  dwarf-messengers  retired  muttering  in  their  beards.  Bard  then 
"Cristal O'Collopy,4261022279511,23-01-1986
"
####-for a brief while and take counsel. 
     and then rolled beneath his chair; 
"     'It's no good, Sam,' he said. 'I  can't  manage  it. This mail-shirt, I "
it will go ill with Saruman.' 
"told. The process  had begun  in the writing  of The Hobbit, in which  there "
"     `Nor is it now, I  will swear,' said Boromir.  `It  is a lie that comes "
that Jomer had not reached the Hornburg. 
"     'To do these things we have ridden far,'  said the king,  'and we shall "
"In desperation they agreed, and Thorin was the first go forward by Bilbo's side. "
"`No you won't,  you thief!'  He panted, staring at Sam  with eyes wide  with "
the day. It has an unwholesome look.' 
"     Sam  looked up  towards the orc-tower, and  suddenly  from  its  narrow "
"back through the forest, down the bank  of the Entwash. They  spoke no  more "
and 
"hood,  cloak,  food,  pony,  his  buttons  and  his  friends. He wandered  on  and  on,  till "
told  him  of  tidings  up  in  the  Mountain  and  of  all  that  it  had  heard.  Then  Bard 
"except a few oddments. I  hope he will be happy,  when he gets used to being "
"Noella Mee,4041373434886358,18-02-1997
"
"that he is above fear; nay, doubt ever gnaws him.' "
"     They stood on a wet floor of polished  stone, the doorstep, as it were, "
"     'To tell you the  truth,' replied Gandalf,  'I  believe that hitherto - "
"old; some that you may be glad to see."" "
"came  rushing  into  Dale.  These  were  the  swiftest  wolf-riders,  and  already  their "
"     When they had sung many songs, and talked of  many things they had done "
a mark for archers of such skill as Gondor once had boasted. Then perceiving 
scratched hand. 
"desperate, I  fear. I  see now little  hope, if  we  do not soon vanish from "
that land also;  for we put much of what little hope we have  in its people. 
about 
"rumoured  that we cannot  now safely pass southward  through  Rohan, and the "
wonderful!  But where were we?'  Then they went  on with  the story from the 
Bert and Tom went off  to  the barrel. William was having another drink. Then 
"     The  hobbits rode on up a  gentle slope, passing a few detached  houses, "
`How do the side and shou lder feel now?' 
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!' 
"song or sound of harps, and the pride and hopes which had stirred in their hearts at "
"Isacco Bradmore,4041377338082,28-12-1975
"
unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be a time  later for you  
slipped away  down  the  long  grey firth;  and the  light of  the  glass of 
we had better get off it quick.' 
the  door  and  took  the  torch;  but  he  could  not  persuade  the  dwarves  to  light  the 
bare was the ground where the beast was burned. 
chief  danger is that the poor beast is probably at  death's door. But there 
"""It  is  about  our  turn  to  help,""  said  Balin,  ""and  I  am  quite  willing  to  go. "
"Grannie Pabelik,4041372452872605,04-10-1984
"
Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies  seven were 
"     'Well  no,  not much,  Sam,'  Frodo  sighed. 'That's  away  beyond  the "
"to whom,  and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out "
"     'I  am very  sorry, Mr.  Gamgee,' said Frodo. 'But now I've  come back, "
"Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what do you desire?"" "
"tied with cords.  Beside him Merry lay,  white-faced, with a  dirty rag bound  "
think the  next stroke must  wait  until morning. Then  we must  call on the 
"Timmy Tunesi,4827763016882462,08-06-1981
"
"stood, as  still as the shadows of  stones, while night went slowly on.  The "
aside from its path and others took their place. 
"""Not so hasty!"" said Bard. ""We will give you until tomorrow. At noon we will "
"large tree-bole, while  Frodo  crept back a few yards  towards  the lane. It "
drive the 
""
"     When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lantern "
"endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the  family  as The  Took, "
"     The Captains  bowed their heads; and when they looked up again, behold! "
"Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing,  a soft  fluttering as of a song "
"and far lands  could be  descried beyond  them, wide and vague. To the south "
"     'Who are  you,  and what are you doing  in this  land?' said the Rider, "
not bother them at all. Others took up the song and it rolled loud and high over the 
"together, we'd best match. Now put this round you!' "
"I mean, what  are  the  meal-times, if you  understand me, and where is  the "
"contriving, nor  in  choosing between this course and another, can  I avail; "
     'Look!' said Gandalf. 'Friends have laboured here.' 
"been  friends, and you owe me something. Come!  Do as you promised: give  it "
sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog. 
"Still, be careful now, if it's very cold!' "
"dear  to me: poor old  Sam,  and Merry and  Pippin. Strider,  too: his heart "
"world maybe it  was,  whose  kind,  fingering  in  forgotten mountains  cold "
"     `Not  yet,' he  said,  'not  yet.' Weariness and  more  than  weariness "
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out 
"his  mother,  Finduilas of Amroth,  who died untimely, and was  to him but a "
Shadow; and it is deepening. War has a lready begun.' 
now we are safe!' 
yellow fangs close to his face.  He had  a  black  knife  with a long jagged 
seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem to 
"Dorolisa Gwinnell,4017954677227572,10-02-1994
"
     They  all laughed.  Frodo felt  his spirits  reviving: the reminder  of 
"there  was  less  noise  and  more  green,  and  the  hobbits  were  still  numerous  and "
     'Wheew!  Gollum! ' Sam called and whistled softly. 'Come on! Still time 
"laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it. "
"accursed tree-slayer that dwelt here. For there was a great inrush of those, "
"Bilbo's  eyes,  he  could  feel  the  heat  of  the  flames;  and  through  the  reek  he  could "
     ve fanyar mbryat Elentbri ortanl 
"Stanislas Whiskin,4041375654918647,08-02-1982
"
"said  Gandalf.  'But  Isengard  cannot  figh t  Mordor,  unless Saruman first  "
into the gloom of  the eastern  shore. The sky was clean again.  There was a  
"     'Now my guests, come!' said Thjoden. 'Come and take such refreshment as "
"than  steel,  if the very shock shall  not destroy them. It was an evil doom "
"he was stumped at last  for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his hand came "
dully through the ponderous stone. 
""
"that is fair, and  though in all lands love is  now  mingled with  grief, it "
"     He stood up.  'Come!' he  cried, and drew his sword, and it  flashed in "
"on one side, and nasty spears on  the other! Little people should not meddle "
"""I beg of  you,"" said Bilbo stammering and standing on one foot, ""to accept this "
"Taffy Simonassi,4041371174913,24-08-1982
"
noise. Looking back  they  saw the  dome of the house crack and smokes issue 
     The crownless again shall be king. 
had come  speeding down  the gale  in  the nick of  time. They  it was who dislodged 
"O! Will you be staying, "
"Ilysa Stansall,4041379384316627,20-04-2001
"
"when the time comes. Believe me or not as you like!"" "
light for  much to  be made of  them. Then again beneath the bole of a great 
place? 
"proper  name  (which  is  wise),  and  don't  want  to  infuriate  them  by  a  flat  refusal "
"Veronica Gorst,4041370931990,09-11-1995
"
     'Come hither! ' said Faramir. `Look at me! Do you know the name of this 
after 
"through the middle  a passage had been  beaten, rising  and falling  like  a  "
the menace  was  more  remote.  But menace  it was. Frodo  felt it  too. His 
My people ride out there now and again.' 
"Gollum  threw  himself  backwards,  and  grabbed  as  the  hobbit  flew  over  him, "
"Faramir's eyes, he faltered. 'Dead?'  he said. `Do you mean that he is dead, "
""
"thing drives out another, and I was full of my own troubles. But i f I may be "
"Carita Houseley,4278226959433,13-11-1988
"
"should  have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed  his "
promised to wait for them here.' 
said Gandalf. 
"Jaye Zuenelli,4050939877626499,26-07-1996
"
"we shall  not meet  again, unless it be far  hence upon  a  road that has no "
"####-Sackville-Bagginses won't never  see the inside of Bag End now, or it  is to "
A  few torches were kindled  and cast a dim  light on the  glisten ing walls.  
"Gandalf's. Inside, written in the  wizard's strong but  graceful script, was "
wain and kept the arms of the king. 
memory and the glory of the years that were gone. 
To find our long-forgotten gold. 
     But Wormtongue only shot a glance of his bleared eyes full of terror at 
shades of dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor; but  away  to their left  
"Now let us rest for a while,  if we can.' "
"road,'  said  Faramir. `You  have little provision, but some small  store of "
For ancient king and elvish lord  
     There was a road  paved with white stone  running on the outer brink of 
"Sallee Corneille,4017950934746875,26-07-1988
"
"     Gandalf  went  from one to the other full of care, and he was told  all "
"And leaves are yet swinging, "
"was mainly  carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father  and son "
"which is fair  beyond the  reach  of your  thought, and only little  wit can "
admittance between sundown and sunrise?' 
"standing,  but the graven hand had  been thrown  down  and broken into small "
"Great River, and though here the Mountains too drew down nearer, Beorn advised "
"     'Whence  come  you?'  he said. 'A halfling,  and in the  livery  of the "
were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow.  
"     'Things have changed since you came  north, Boromir,' answered Gandalf.  "
you  can  trust  him  to  guess where  the  other  end  of  the  tunnel  is. He will break all 
"####-But before he could overtake him, Gollum  was gone. Then  as the  dark  hole "
"it was not. It was two more dwarves, both with blue hoods, silver belts, and yellow "
This thing all things devours:  
"     'I know not,' said Faramir. 'But whence came the boat? ' "
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when 
"     At length they stirred and looked up, and began  to search for anything "
day. I do not know to  what  company  you will be  assigned; or the Lord may 
lifted from his lap the  thing that  he had been gazing at.  In each hand he 
has yet gone. 
any  of us  set foot upon the  Mountains of Shadow. Of them we know only old 
terror. 
"fall. And may death find  you swiftly, within Gondor  or  without,  if you do "
"years; tall and kingly he had been, but now he was withered as an old stone.  "
"restless and anxious,  listening in vain for a  sound of Gandalf. He decided "
"knew that I  was one of their  Northern kindred, and therefore they did  not "
"####-escaped from  the springs above,  and leaving the main  water, fell tinkling "
to weep and mutter. The hobbits waited patiently. 
"back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same; for I shall "
"     Side by side they lay; and  down swept Gwaihir, and down came Landroval "
would not stay behind. 
"Blackroot Vale,  tall Duinhir with  his sons, Duilin and  Derufin,  and five "
"####-overtaking us, riding hard.' "
uncounted had stood that ancient place that  Men called Isengard.  Partly it 
"halt, waiting for those on foot. Men now hurried out to them from the  City;  "
"Dorey Moreton,4041376733287202,20-03-1994
"
"Darcy Mocher,4237433991175,20-01-1996
"
"Ansley Berthome,4041591832332,15-03-1986
"
"Johnath Roft,4017953235934,28-11-1975
"
"     `That is true,' said Celeborn, `but is all this Company  going with you  "
""
 
"There  is  no  time  now.  While  he  was  picking  up  stones,  the  spider  had  reached "
"way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!' "
dark against the East and South. 
"     the dog began to roar, "
"     They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them; slanting "
"     But  when, after the  Standing Silence, wine was brought there came  in "
"dams, gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream "
but  rising  from  the near side of  the  rocky  floor  there  is a great glow. The glow of 
"Moria far  away. He  sat upon the ground for a long while, silent, his  head "
"Shelob, fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt  beyond the reach  of "
"Innis Buer,4041371291980,02-12-1999
"
shapes were hurrying. 
"     'I have a sword,' said Merry, climbing from his  seat, and drawing from "
"     'I do  not know myself for certain,'  answered the wizard. 'I was there "
"don't  say,  Master  Gandalf! Well I never!  Who'd  have  thought it in  our "
"Baggins!  Hobbit!  You  dratted  hobbit!  Hi!  hobbit,  confusticate  you,  where  are "
"for me and  you. Don't go getting mixed up in  the business of your betters, "
"####-smile, seeing Frodo's glance. 'And  there have been even stranger travellers "
""
""
again.' He picked up his bag and moved to the  door. 
air brings messages. Already the  wind  is turning. There comes a breath out 
"House  miles  behind,  they  were  still  going  up  and  up  and  up.  It  was  a  hard  path "
"the  mountain-side. Here  the huge cliff face sloped backwards, and the path "
"Shadows were  not  seen again  that day,  yet  ever and anon, high above the "
"seldom, being  busy  with many matters; and she dwelt still in the Houses of "
strolling  on their way along the groves and glades of Ithilien; but  though 
     and hear there a horn in the hills ringing. 
"     of all that I have seen, "
could  see  there  neither camps nor troops moving; but all  that region was 
there again. 
grey east wind had passed away. The thin  crescent  of the  Moon had  fallen  
"Boonie Eckersley,4041595507559,10-03-1995
"
"     'I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,' said Sam. "
"Reta Boakes,4321263594984,19-09-1987
"
"guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!' "
"Kiele Ewbanks,4041595274790098,18-01-1992
"
will follow your counsel.' 
"""Go back up the passage!"" some shouted. "
"avalanche  in  the  mountains. Even  a s  we talk  here,  I  hear  the  first "
when  the  men of Harad  and their  great beast were overthrown:  a  captain 
get up very early and cook everybody else's wretched breakfast. The Tookishness 
stands  aloft  a  great  hall of Men. And it  seems to  my eyes  that it  is 
"others. But still we  fight on, holding all  the  west shores of Anduin; and  "
line. He  wondered how long he would be able to  go on at this pace: he  had 
blowing horns echoed in the hills.  
     They had not gone  more than a  few yards  when from behind them came a  
"things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn't. And then "
rode 
"     'In a  high chamber of the Burg,' said  Legolas. 'He has neither rested "
"for  silver  and  white  gems;  and  though  his  hoard  was  rich,  he  was  ever  eager  for "
     For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered.  'Bilbo!'  it  said. 'But 
"Dev Forsdyke,4973264599230999,25-05-1992
"
"read; and for the rest,  few ever unlock them. I can  read a little in them, "
"the Sirannon,  that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors "
place  where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars.  There is no descent 
to put your feet or your hands?' 
"Dov Pollastrino,4250193220323689,19-04-1985
"
and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for him to see. The 
"Griswold Plaistowe,4017955688151826,08-11-1995
"
The dwarves all gathered round when they heard the wizard talking like this to 
away. 
been dammed  and had filled  all the valley.  Beyond the  ominous water were 
"Storm Izchaki,4017958859225,30-12-1998
"
fluted  and twisted into dreamlike forms;  they spring up from many-coloured 
"     At last he wa s no more than a  dozen  feet from the ground, right above "
"bear  you.  He is One  of the  Mearas, unless our eyes  are cheated  by some "
     Long had the terror of  the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty 
"Theadora Burds,4200151674829,04-02-1997
"
"clouds of Mordor were being driven back, their edges tattering as a wind out "
"befall their lord.  Merry and  Pippin  sat on the bottom step,  feeling both "
"coming  to  the  secret  door  in  the  Lonely  Mountain,  perhaps  that  very  next  first "
his hearing and  other senses  sharpened. He could smell the  trees and  the 
"Birgitta Feek,4041374292537901,17-06-1978
"
"     Once,  looking suddenly back,  as if some prickle of the skin told  him "
"bird, was to be seen, but in these open places Gollum grew afraid, and  they  "
like  great pinnacles or pillars  of stone  they seemed.  Tall and sheer and 
"Last night the  moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras  to "
"the  younger  dwarves  (I  think  I  should  be  right  in  naming  Kili  and  Fili,  for "
have a  nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were 
climb. It was a long and weary ascent; but this  stairway did not delve into 
"to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret "
"and  they said: 'Farewell now, Meriadoc of the  Shire  and Holdwine  of  the "
"They debated  long on what was  to be done, but  they could  think of no way of "
"and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out. "
"Carlynn Rosenzwig,4041599597663,20-07-1993
"
"At  that he woke up with a horrible start, and found  that part of his dream was "
"powers  in  the world,  for good  or for evil. Some are  greater  than I am. "
come 
"     'The stroke  on the left  might  be a G-rune  with thin branches,' said "
bring the prisoner to me.' 
"Hobbits go light, and  their  footprints are not  easy  even for a Ranger to "
     At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about. They were 
"done well,' he said.  `We have reached the borders of the country  that  Men "
"leagues lay  between them and the Men of  Rohan,  their only friends in this "
With strength that men trusted 
"was answered  three times from far  above. `I will  go first,' said  Haldir. "
"Frodo a  brief visit,  and after taking a good look at him he went off again. "
"     'Not alone!' said Gimli, fingering  the blade of his axe,  and  looking "
"into the heart of the  hills, and vanished  out  of all  knowledge. The Ring "
####-     It was actually not long before Gollum returned; but he came so quietly 
horses with shining  white riders; and there wer e many rolling and  grinding 
"willow-shades or twinkling in  the sun, danced  and rippled for his  torment "
come; but here neither spring nor summer would ever come again. Here 
""
"pavements, nor voice was heard in their halls, nor any face looked out  from "
"     'Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honour:  ever we bear  the brunt of "
"####-aside into other paths, as chance allows. The further you  go, the less easy "
"not  a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved  it  from rolling into  a pool. "
"look  at that stone? I know I can't have it, with old Ganda lf sitting on it, "
"Quinta Casari,4724469590070,11-01-1985
"
"do  more. It was impossible to  find you, Frodo, in  the wilderness, and  it "
"The passage was low and roughly made. It was not too difficult for the hobbit, "
"     `Nor me,' said  Sam. `Grrr!  Those eyes did give me a  turn! But perhaps "
"     Its  name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful  rumour.  Aragorn  could  "
"     'Or another and another and another,' muttered Sam.  `Or  maybe no day.  "
"the country, and there were  no other dwellings close  by.  You could get in "
"hobbits  took it in turn to watch. At first, tired as they  were, neither of "
"     'There's some devilry at work in the Shire,' he said. 'Elrond knew what "
great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.' 
falls  seemed  to  be hushed.  Frodo sat and  shivered in his wraps. He  was 
"here tonight and break our fast tomorrow, it  will be enough. For  I ride on "
"elf-countries,  the  dream  of which was a  cold fear to all  his  kind.  And "
"yet it  did not achieve  its  end. Sauron was diminished, but not destroyed. "
light looking at long tables filled with folk. 
"unrolling  blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber, as far  "
"a lily, cold as frost, and hard as graven stone.  But he bent and kissed her  "
them? And now I cannot forget them.' 
turned left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor. 
have been chosen by my  father and the elders but he put himself forward. as 
"about his neck and under his jacket. ""Now things begin to look more hopeful. This "
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last  
Than silver in treasure: 
     They  found that they  were looking  at a  most extraordinary face.  It 
"Alana Becken,4017957301302414,06-11-1998
"
"for a while, until all the filth  of Saruman  is washed away. Then  Isen can "
""
"""Fili  or  Kili,""  he  thought  by  the  tip  of  a  blue  hood  sticking  out  at  the  top. "
"the stone at their feet. They sprang towards  the door  in alarm. Doom, doom "
either: whether we'll  go along with him or no. He knows we mean to.  That's 
long grey road. 
the wilderness. ' 
"Whittaker McIlvaney,4017959250177748,14-05-1998
"
"morning  as  at  night,  and  very  secret:  ""a  sort  of watching  and waiting  feeling,""  he "
"road  that  lies  to  the  south  of  your  country,  when  we  were  attacked  by  the  evil "
"Ulberto Pendrich,4041378787792475,22-06-1982
"
heart that he would not be troubled again from that direction. In-the meanwhile he 
is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought  to get on together. 
sword.' 
"fissure  had opened. Out of it a fierce  red light came,  and  now and aga in "
"foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and "
"said. 'Farewell, Sam!  This is the  end at last.  On  Mount  Doom doom shall "
"     The next day they spent also in his company,  but they  did not  go far "
Chapter 2. The Riders of Rohan 
"     'Very  good! But  before  you go, I  should like  a  word  with you  in "
"Gollum got  into his boat  and  shot off  from  the  island, while Bilbo was  sitting "
don't you keep up?' 
""
"shall be, lord, as you command. "
wished to see Elf-magic?  ' 
     'Thus  it was  that  I  came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately 
"trees climbed, mounting  one  head above another; and  above them again were "
things feared to break them. But after ages alone in the dark Gollum's heart 
forgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The  birds and beasts do not tell tales of that 
"     It  may indeed have been  daytime now, as Gollum said, but the  hobbits "
"     No one paid any heed to their orders; but as the  ruffians passed, they "
"Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the  leagues  of Wilderland:  indeed "
"such  cover  as they could find,  but moving always in  a slant towards  the "
"of  the West,  and were more  dangerous  and  less wise.  For most  of  them  (together "
"light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the "
"brother Jomer, or better  like  Thjoden the king, for he  died  and has both "
"that, bent like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt. "
easier to give it away at the same time. It hasn't made it any easier in the 
"     The  Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They were "
paused and fell silent. 
""
that her loveliness amid her grief would pierce his heart. And she looked at 
where we are.' 
"Timmy Conn,4951596457986,25-10-1977
"
over  the plains of Rohan  and  the wall of  the Emyn Muil was  lost in  the 
"     'No, not  all,'  said  Pippin.  'And  we have many  of our  own,  which "
did you do it?' 
hidden from  the  man's sight behind his  guards; now  he  urged  his  horse 
"     'Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say "
"of  hard  beds, and on every wall  there was  a notice and a list  of Rules. "
any  moment to he  attacked and to feel throttling fingers seize  his throat 
messages 
"and Halbarad with the standard, and Elladan  and Elrohir with stars on their "
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make  amends by finding 
"""We  are  sent  from  Dain  son  of  Nain,""  they  said  when  questioned.  ""We  are "
"not say. Into the stronghold of  the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he "
"Westbrook Shakespeare,4041371807231,01-11-1992
"
"have a borne it, it'd have been the death of me.' "
 
whether they are true or false.' 
"Kiley MacDonagh,4041591316013,01-08-1978
"
"####-assault. 'Well, well, now at  any rate  I understand  poor Denethor a little "
"The dragon-fire, from twisted wire  "
fell sprawling and  lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his 
wooded ridges behind   their camp  and down into the hidden Stonewain Valley. 
Hiding  behind  one  of  the  largest  barrels  Bilbo  discovered  the  trapdoors  and 
good  wine:  Frodo's  wine  had  not  been  included  in  the  sale  to  the 
"down on us! If  you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away, "
The winds were moaning in the night. 
"meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.' "
"looking  for  new  homes,  or  are marching  to  war  (which  I  am  glad  to  say  has  not "
and  the  forest-silence deeper. There was no wind that evening to bring even a sea-
"went  along  the  shore  to  the  great  bridge. There were  guards  at  the  head  of  it,  but "
"impatient at these solemnities. ""We are worn and famished after our long road and "
"     'They  come from Mordor,'  said  Strider in a low  voice. 'From Mordor, "
show our friendship by starving together.' 
"arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of  the  echoing  "
"not  meant  for  his  soldiers  or  his  servants,  but  for  the  king's  feasts  only,  and  for "
     'Try!' said Gandalf. Try now!' 
"Gwenora Marquese,4041599362508867,21-11-1978
"
"encircling all  its wide girth from south to north, it climbed at last, high "
"""For the Arkenstone of my father,"" he said, ""is worth more than a river of gold "
"Gandalf, though now and again his glance strayed to Pippin, as if to refresh "
"""Now  do  be  careful!""  whispered  the  hobbit,  ""and  quiet  as  you  can  be! There "
"Coraline Flay,4095104607332051,27-08-1989
"
"####-and  gone with  him to the end; but if I  seek him now  in the wilderness, I "
beat. 
     Then the weather  clouded  over.  That was on Wednesday the  eve of the  
sudden  there  were  hundreds  of  eyes  looking  at  them.  Still  Dori  did  not  let  Bilbo 
"     'Your  guide  must  be  blindfolded,' said Faramir, 'but  you and  your "
"Brant Pedrol,4041591023483242,04-07-1981
"
"and Fengel, and Thengel, and Thjoden the latest. And when Thjoden  was "
"Smjagol. That's the one idea in  all his little schemes, if he has any.  But "
Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.' 
"gilded and silvered and  impenetrable;  the necklace of Girion, Lord of Dale, made "
the  rock  was bored into  a hundred caves and maggot -holes: there a host of 
"tongue; his hand groped  out  and clasped the  wrapped stone, then he sighed  "
Full on  the  town he  fell. His  last  throes splintered  it  to sparks and gledes. The 
"A glint  came  into his  eyes, and Sam  catching the gleam in  the  darkness "
strength and all your speed; lest Gondor fall at last.' 
""
'history' for Elvish tongues. 
"Jammie Di Claudio,4851151536139853,06-02-1981
"
can't say any more. I  don't remember anything else.' 
"Rafa Guidera,4041374695013,19-09-1995
"
"     'No it isn't,' said Frodo.  `But  the day is getting darker instead  of "
     And Minas Morgul answered. There was a flare of livid lightnings: forks 
"Ashton Millom,4041594645057014,28-08-1988
"
"the right, away  from the  main trail; for he had seen  footprints that went "
"""What on earth did I ask him to tea for!"" he said to him-self, as he went to the "
     When  he returned  Sam  and  Pippin had got a good fire going. 'Water!' 
"Grissel Ducket,4041599912339375,08-07-2000
"
"stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which it ran  and then "
me for healing! I am a shieldmaiden and my hand is ungentle. But I thank you  
"""At  yours  and  your  family's!""  replied  Bilbo,  remembering  his  manners  this "
arm. 
     `Follow me!' he  cried. 'The water is not deep. Let us wade  across! On 
"     Sam knelt  by him. Faint, almost  inaudibly, he heard Frodo whispering: "
"elf-stone.  Whether it was set  there, or  let fall by chance, I cannot say; "
"as he said this, and the hobbit wondered if he guessed at the part of his tale that he "
"Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free. "
stay to  sleep.' said Legolas. 'Surely even Orcs must pause on  the  march?' 
"Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited  for an opportunity, when "
     Here Bilbo's hand ended and Frodo had written: 
"     'I saw him, Mr.  Butterbur,' said a hobbit;  'or leastways I didn't see "
should advise him and his friends to be more careful.' 
"     'O Fair  Folk!  This is good fortune beyond my hope,' said  Pippin. Sam "
Come! Tra-la-la-lally! 
press with the thrust of bitter spears. But  Gandalf lifted up his arms  and 
waking earth returned: green flowed over the wide meads  of Rohan; the white 
the Storm  of  Mordor and were lost  to  mortal sight; but the Dead followed 
"the edge.  Half hauled, half scrambling. Frodo came up  and threw himself on "
"contrast; and if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of "
"trees were  larger, taller, and  thicker  than any that the hobbits had ever "
"""My mind does not change with the rising and setting of a few suns,"" answered "
"the Anduin. 'Is that another city, or what is it?' "
"Here  they  found  a  flat  place  without  a  wall  on  three  sides,  but  backed  to  the "
"     There was  very much more. A  great deal  of the song had no words, and  "
"him: 'Elfstone,  through  darkness  you have come to your hope, and have now "
known  that  news  of  this  had  reached  Gandalf  far  away  and  given  him  great 
"Marlo Premble,4041590706164970,25-05-1998
"
"horns answered it, and lights shone out across the river. "
"Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!' "
"     'Good . . . good luck!' cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. 'I don't "
without leaving a hole!  
back. 
as  our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of  the baggage in a deep drift 
"Gelya Costi,4041377509377,24-03-1988
"
trees they saw now an opening like an arched gate  under mighty  boughs; and 
     Twilight  was about  them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind 
"behind  a  stone,  put an arrow in  his eye as he ran up, and he fell with a  "
in  the  wilderness;  and  it is chiefly because of  his wound that I am  so 
looked  into  a  clearing where  some  trees  had  been  felled  and  the  ground  levelled. 
"and  their red  berries in the  autumn  were  a burden,  and a beauty  and a  "
"back to  their drink and their talk, perceiving  that their captain had  had "
"Maryanne Fluit,4017956943682,16-09-1998
"
"(for Bard now stood close beside him). ""He has tonight earned an eminent place in "
malice.  But none were more dangerous  than the Great Willow:  his heart was 
""
"Drew Eglington,4017951473314257,17-08-1989
"
"These  were,  in  fact,  precisely  their  plans  (for  the  raven-messengers  had  been "
"'You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss  Primula Brandybuck.  She  was "
remained steady and did not pass.  
nothing could be seen. 
"stones standing like  a gate, and before long they came to the  northern gap "
"journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.' "
"     `Well, there  are many reasons why they should,' said Gandalf, smiling. "
part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton  - but you can  go 
"     Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow, and  there "
"wizard,  ""and  now  by  good management  and  good  luck  I  have  done  it.  Indeed we "
"the gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, though I knew "
"     'You cannot go home alone,' said the Lady. 'You did not wish to go home "
evil;  but the weather may prove a  more deadly enemy than any. What  do you  
"Sirannon, the  Gate-stream, they used  to call  it. But what has happened to "
- that at least was clear from the first. Then I heard Bilbo's strange story 
footprints  as he passed; but in  the waybread of the Elves he found all the 
""
confusion.   Many  of  the   Ents   were   hurling  themselves  against  the 
above her. With  a cry of hatred that stung the very ears  like venom he let 
"pit, high-banked upon the west. It was  cold and dead, and  a foul  sump  of "
captain 
the staff from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Quick as  a snake 
"     'Gladly will I take it,' said the king; and laying his  long old  hands "
"     'It is,' said the dwarf. `But what the  word  was  is  not  remembered. "
"Frodo and his friends rode behind. Merry, Pippin, and  Sam sat at their ease "
"lily-bowls,  and ran  laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled "
"     As   if roused by a sudden  bell,  Frodo rose quickly,  and stood up and "
     Then  Boromir  had come  leaping through  the  trees. He had made  them 
and when night fell they vanished into the darkness of Mordor. All  the land 
"long hands  draw  upwards  to  his mouth; his white fangs gleamed,  and then "
"and then  Tom turned due north, for they  had been  bearing  somewhat to the "
"and was swallowed up, and was never heard again in that age of this world. "
long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head. 
feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.' 
down. 
What could it mean? Gollum could see in the dark. Bilbo could see the light of 
clouds and mists of the night were gone. 
"hidden away  by  the  ruffians in  sheds and barns and deserted  holes,  and "
the battle.' 
"it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.' "
     But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with Legolas and 
"     'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I  look foul and feel fair. Is that  it? All "
"Since  he  has  got  an  invisible  ring,  and  ought  to  be  a  specially  excellent "
"refused  the  way, and he stood sweating and trembling  in a  fear  that was "
Frodo 
asking 
"     'Dark times,' said  Strider. 'But for  the present you  may be left  in "
 
and 
"horses of  Aragorn and Legolas. Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, bu t Jomer  "
not find out more about it until later. 
the north-gate  in the Rammas the king halted again. The first  jored drew up 
inclined as his master  to take no thought  for  their livelihood beyond the 
"the  nose,  and  he  leaped  in  the  air  ten  feet,  and  then  rushed  round  and  round  the "
     Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. 'Let us light 
"match, near enough. And now we must be off!' "
Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.' 
"indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.' "
"Aurie Tubridy,4041591680087773,30-08-1993
"
"     As  if his indomitable spirit had set  its potency in motion, the glass "
"     'Denethor  has gone  to  the  Tombs,'  said Pippin, 'and  he has  taken "
"####-     Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way and to "
"stair was dark, but on the roof-top the glare of the Mountain could still be "
one of  these days. I will: fried fish  and chips served by  S.  Gamgee. You  
"one hand lies darkness, and on the other only hope. But if  hope  should not "
"and half  a ripe  cheese: good plain food, as good  as the Shire could show, "
"     Troll sat alone on his seat of stone, "
""
     'Then I think it  is not  for me to say more  - lest terror should keep 
"     'Then I must go for my axe,' said Gimli. "
"it! Yea, and all these other of the king's men that lie here.' And he looked "
"Jenda Janusik,4041371763822,08-04-1992
"
we shouldn't try and beat the Bullroarer.' 
     'This  is indeed  wonderful!'  they  said. 'Three hobbits in  a wood at 
"heavily  and  leaned  aga inst Sam, who  put his arms  about him.  They stood "
and  darkening now; and  therefore  our fear  and disquiet grow too. And the 
"Jomer drained the  cup. Then Jowyn bade those  that served to fill the cups, "
which the tight -curled  fronds of  spring  were just  thrusting through  the 
"he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon a s the shadows had fallen "
"about him, and  it  drenched and  drowned him. Swiftly  he  sank  under  its "
"     'We know not for certain,' answered  Elrond sadly. `Some hope that  the "
loud that they could  shoot you in the dark.' Sam  hastily put his hand over 
"behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest and  the dark hills, "
"found a  few gnarled and stunted  trees,  the first they  had seen for days: "
"Frants Duncklee,4325160688542,09-03-1998
"
 
"Nolan Gunbie,4391676836191334,04-04-1992
"
"     But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to  die, it was turned to a new "
must take the road south as soon as it is fully light.' 
"Daren Jiroutka,4041597329408,15-04-1991
"
that it already seems too  late. The mountains to the west are growing evil; 
""
"the City, either north of Cair Andros because of  the marshes, or southwards "
that was not an echo. 
"Galvan Rowcliffe,4952310830846906,06-10-1981
"
"""Seems  to  know  as  much  about  the  inside  of  my  larders  as  I  do  myself!"" "
####- 
"again. Glorfindel  still  urged them  on, and  only allowed two brief  halts "
     his shining helm afar was seen; 
They all sprang up and began to caper about for joy.  
of tarred sheds. All the chestnuts were gone. The  banks and  hedgerows were 
"before his  time. But however that may be, my lord Faramir is abroad, beyond "
"     'I do so,' said Denethor. "
"words, and he shook poor Bilbo like a rabbit. "
Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!' 
no  heed  of them.  Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down  the  huge and 
had written his book. 
     For  a  moment  the thought flitted through  Merry's  mind:  'Where  is 
and the mirth  of the Rohirrim was a  torrent  of laughter and a flashing of 
hood over his face. 
     A shadow bent over  Pippin. It  was Ugl®k. 'Sit up! ' said the  Orc. 'My 
the Bridge. Half a mile northward  along this they came to a lane opening on  
"burning glow; and from it rose  in huge columns a swirling smoke,  dusty red "
of the Tower; and many who looked  up thither  at that time saw a pale light  
boulders. For a moment  I was afraid that  we  had let  loose too  fierce  a  
Now he  sent  a  swift  and  sure  shot  into the leaping beast. As it reached the further 
"struggled with his own weariness, and he took Frodo's hand; and there he sat "
caught  a  sudden  thin  and  piercing  ray  of  red  from  under  the  drooping  lid.  of 
"all fours, peering at them with gleaming eyes.  "
"Barbra Doche,4925038739771,22-06-1984
"
"the Elf and Gimli the  Dwarf, our  comrades. Go now and  say to your  master  "
"     `An awe fell on me, for  a pale light was round it. But I rose and went "
until they were conquered in their weakness by the wild men. 
"went a stair of stone, high  and  broad, and  on either side of the  topmost  "
"the table with  a crash, clatter, and bump!  The audience  all opened  their "
cords on Gollum's wrists and ankles and raised him to his feet. 
"     He  raised his staff,  and for a  brief instant there was blaze  like a  "
"names. For I am not going to tell you my name, not yet at any rate.' A queer  "
"Barr Gaddesby,4041377499231,16-08-1994
"
shapes. Light  was growing behind them.  Slowly it crept towards the  North. 
"Faramir, and  he says we are all to burn, and he will not wait, and they are "
Wood as in his own house.' 
"leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after  "
"     Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver -hafted knife, his quiver and "
"out, and all awoke. The moon was gone.  Stars were  shining  above; but over "
"Panchito Ocklin,4017954189424253,30-10-1983
"
"keen  eyes  of  your fair  kindred, Legolas,' he said; 'and they  can tell  a  "
breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see what is going on!' 
women that must go  with them.  They must all  be gone from the Gate and the 
"inhabited again,  and with power sevenfold. A black cloud lies often over it "
"     'Good  evening  to  you!' they said, and passed through; and then  they "
As they sang the hobbit felt the love of beautiful things made by hands and by 
brings has some hope in it. For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened his 
"been questioned long and deeply, though no words had been spoken openly.  "
 
"I  fear that if I enter it unbidden, then doubt and debate may  arise, which "
""
his eyes. Seeing the banner he made a sign that it should be given to Jomer. 
night 
more dangerous than he looks.' 
lantern threw upon its shrouded  walls. And dimly to  be seen were many rows 
they had been busy. 
"Millie Prestage,4041592574701,22-03-1995
"
####- 
other purposes.' 
"Seka Waring,4017959363344540,15-03-2001
"
"long  ago  one  of  the  Took  ancestors  must  have  taken  a  fairy  wife.  That  was,  of "
"away. Come, Legolas and Gimli! I must speak with you as I eat.' "
you to Frogmorton?' 
"     We heard of the horns in the hills ringing, "
"hideous shadow over the  moon was fading, things left behind in the mists of "
"Susan Warrilow,4017959228651,13-10-1978
"
"is to get well in the tunnel and shut the door."" "
"and tubs away to the north bank, in which it had eaten out a wide bay. This had a "
"with grief  at  the porter. 'This deed I  shall  ever rue,'  he said; 'but a  "
""
"dark,  the  sound  of harsh  singing.  They  had  climbed far  up  into  the "
     `Elbereth Gilthoniel!' sighed Legolas as he  looked up.  Even as he did 
"Saruman said nay, and repeated what  he had  said to us before: that the One "
"Leone Stringer,4322109011700947,01-10-1996
"
"the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and  "
"like a deep-throated horn in the woods, and seemed  to echo  from the trees.  "
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!' 
Next  day  the  trumpets  rang  early  in  the  camp. Soon  a  single  runner was  seen 
"Faber McCaughen,4017956766745,07-03-1996
"
"but the  rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of  which  gripped "
could have been held long against us. Now we  can sweep through - if once we 
"Ninnette Atwool,4041591248851,03-07-1982
"
     Aragorn  sprang swiftly away and  went in pursuit of  Sam. Just  as  he 
splash as Gollum leapt from his boat. 
"     `Yes,' said  Gandalf, 'and I do not like it. It may  have nothing to do "
trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At first  
but he waits for you.' 
to the left round the comer  of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came 
"Keven Hadkins,4041599822079,11-07-1984
"
"fingers. ""This has been  handled recently,' he said.  'What do you  think of "
In 
"'Store-room  in there,  and above  the woods, luckily,' said Pippin, as they "
"a cleft between two dark crags, and passing through found  themselves on the "
"Karalee Gaukroger,4041375676731,21-09-1990
"
After  a  good  deal  of  creeping  and  crawling  they  peered  round  the  trunks  and 
"     'The treacherous are ever distrustful,' answered  Gandalf wearily. 'But "
time for speech. Have you athelas?' 
"     Merry did not like this talk of wild men  and poisoned darts, but quite "
"course,  that  that was  Thorin;  and  after  a while he  found  that his guess was  right. "
"mess you two precious captains have made of things, fighting over the swag.' "
"awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people "
"say,  and  'Third  time  pays  for  all.'  I  am  going  down  the  tunnel  once  again.  I  have "
strangers. 
"Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea.  Its gates lay in ruin; "
and did not rouse him; but he did not dare to  go to  sleep himself. At last  
"dance for joy. Even so,  I cannot  help feeling  happy; happier than I  have "
he talks.  For the present Merry and I are busy.  We are knights of the City 
"Then  he  felt  for  his  pouch,  and  there  was  some  tobacco  in  it,  and  that  was "
"     `It is now many years ago,' said Gluin, `that a shadow of disquiet fell "
dwarves bowing again. 
"slain. I am Bard, of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon!"" "
we are too tired to go any further at present.' 
"now, what of your tale?' "
"fair  enough. But the Ents could say  more on their side,  if they had time! "
and paused. If he  was considering what word would close the gate again from 
"Panting under his load Sam turned the bend;  and even  as he did  so, out of "
black shadows. 
lifted up his head and neighed. And out of the  darkness the answering neigh  
"     Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window  of a  "
"O! Where are you going, "
"you  knew  enough  Elvish  at  least to  know  d®n-udan: Man  of  the  West, "
"Orcs, and found out my mistake  afterwards. Very odd  you  are, indeed. Root "
"victory of  Minas  Tirith (and  his own glory therein), might desire  such a  "
""
"orc-weapon,'  he said,  holding it gingerly, and looking with disgust at the "
"     On  the near side of him lay, gleaming on  the ground, his elven-blade,  "
"Kristos Freckelton,4041590598087966,17-06-1991
"
"     Soon the dwindling company, following the  Isen,  turned west  and rode "
"Bladorthin  (long  since  dead),  each  had  a  thrice-forged head and  their  shafts were "
"looked up  glancing  keenly at the hobbit. A young man,  Merry thought as he "
"far on the road, even as far as  the  country  of Rohan.  In three days  now "
"afloat in  little open  boats  in  the midst of shelterless  lands, and on a  "
"through all the labour of the climb, and come so near the land  he fears? He "
"Lind Sandells,4884958468523495,22-04-1981
"
"a whole list of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he  could "
"Constantin Linne,4017958437626,12-10-1986
"
"the Bree-land,  out in the  pathless  wilderness, and  drawing  near  to the "
"     'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow "
"     But the answer came at  once: `And the  Council gave him companions, so "
mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come 
"Carn  Dym came on  us at  night,  and  we were worsted. Ah! the spear  in my "
"""Very  pretty!""  said  Gandalf.  ""But  I  have  no  time  to  blow  smoke-rings  this "
they  were  soon  all  in  flames.  Very  soon  all  about  the  glade  wolves  were  rolling 
and  the  top of his head was bald. He was an aged raven of great size. He alighted 
"Britney Posselwhite,4041379077191,02-02-1983
"
     'I  doubt  if you will  find a path quicker  than the one that the Orcs 
"my arms!""; but Dori groaned ""my poor legs, my poor legs!"" "
""
"     'This,'  he says, 'is the one art that we can certainly claim to be our "
"the  Biggest,  can  make mistakes. Something  nearly slipped you say. I say, "
     'Let us go!' said Legolas.  
Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie. 
Gandalf. 'Don't be too troubled. He'll be all right -  now. He left a packet 
"I heard, and  dim horns b lowing, and a murmur as of countless far voices: it  "
"him, dragging  at the chain about his  neck; and his  eyes too, as he looked "
"It was an unfortunate remark, for  the dragon spouted  terrific flames after him, "
than allow them  to escape or to  be rescued;  but  it  was his undoing. The 
"     `Quite right, Sam,'  laughed Bilbo. `You can  trot off and tell Gandalf "
"Nick McMoyer,4503180111380469,22-06-2000
"
'Belike the old tales speak well; there is Elvish blood in the veins of that 
"     But when  would it come? The night seemed endless and  timeless, minute "
at Bag End on a summer's morning. 
and  they  found  it  hard  to  leave.  Bilbo  would  gladly  have  stopped  there  for  ever 
"appear through the clouds, and  not long after midnight there was a tall wood "
blanket  all  round us. The air seemed hot and  heavy; and it  was  full  of 
"     'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and "
"for  anything,  or  to  search  for  the  lost  path.  The  lost  path!  No  other  idea  would "
"Captain  leads  them once again,  and the fear of him  has passed before him "
"Katharine Feasley,4444706283196713,26-11-2000
"
"     But from the West has come no word, "
"Joaquin Gymlett,4041599489812,18-05-1990
"
flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such  
Lossarnach two days  ago; and  Angbor the fearless rides  before them. If we 
"Men. Their own  records  began only  after the settlement of the  Shire, and "
"stood. But on the walls men looked up, listening with wonder; for the echoes "
the  hill.  Behind  them  Sam  came upon  a  small store of  firewood neatly 
"beside the king's stool and waited on him till presently the old man, coming "
"     Gollum laughed. 'The Dead Marshes,  yes, yes: that is their names,'  he "
"####-     'I  did not say so,' said Gandalf. 'Who knows?  Have patience. Go where "
"     Swiftly then he told of  the haunted  road under the mountains, and the "
under the shadow of the White Mountains and  know  something of journeys  
"stronghold of Sauron,' answered Gandalf.  `I alone of you  have ever been in "
"Sherry Heel,4608184746168,14-04-1984
"
     To Pippin's  surpr ise he  found that much of the  talk was intelligible 
Still Bombur  slept  and  they grew very weary. At  times  they heard disquieting 
"Lars Somerscales,4041370313983,05-10-1976
"
Balin was  told  off  to watch  the  guard  and  the  butler  and  give warning  if  they 
"'Good-bye, Gandalf!' "
grasses  and  all things growing  or  living  in  the  land belong  each  to 
"Maxie Queree,4017955728050,09-11-1979
"
"any sign  of  these in the  valley, when  he looked out from the hill in the "
"Smials,  and at Brandy Hall.  This  account of the end of  the Third  Age is "
each of  them had also a  short broad  sword at his  side and a  round  shield  slung at 
"it seemed, standing by  the  door of the unlit  chamber, mastering  his  own "
"     When he had overcome  Sancho and  pushed him out, Frodo  collapsed on a  "
"Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that "
"Hilly Georgiades,4017951149335,13-04-1993
"
"hard skull. All the same I feel sick and my legs are like straws."" "
"Karrie Billing,4017954284866275,25-07-1995
"
may perhaps find wisdom.' 
"Lannie Busfield,4041374353878,02-05-1979
"
"Enemy of  old, at  length  taking shape  and power  again.  Some,  too, will "
have fallen  asleep on your  feet and taken the wrong turning. When we found 
"But  the  Elvenking  said:  ""Long will  I  tarry,  ere  I  begin  this war  for  gold.  The "
"with you, it  is well  to pay attention to  him, especially if the Ranger is "
fear the battle will be over long ere I come there. ' 
their  backs bowed  under  their  burdens.  Even  Strider  seemed  tired and 
"Oriana Greggersen,4017954064617468,21-11-1993
"
but  Frodo would  only say  no doubt everything will be  cleared  up  in the 
"     Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey  net, and hewed it  with a wide "
"the  Mountain,  and  there  is  no  knowing  what  a  dwarf  will  not  dare  and  do  for "
"with you! You are not the hobbit that you were."" "
"looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of 'hastiness'. He was "
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it 
"have not much hope  that Gollum can be cured before  he dies, but there is a  "
floor of a large  round chamber. A red lamp hung from its roof; the westward 
"blades, and stand back to back!' "
     The landlord  jumped with surprise.  'You!'  he  cried.  'You're always 
"     `It  is  difficult to  keep awake here, until you get used to it;'  said "
"cracking and sly noises, but there was  no  sound of  voice or  of foot. Far "
altogether against the grain  of his nature.  `Have  I  got it  wrong? '  he 
""
"Josefina Brookson,4201949228233,17-06-1988
"
"     `No, no oliphaunts,' said Gollum again.   'Smjagol has not heard of them. "
"Cammi Durrett,4041598377679,26-10-1976
"
"     When there's good cheer among the guests, "
"Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground ' said Jomer. "
"     Denethor  looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did, "
"the shadow of a living thing, a creature now wholly ruined and defeated, yet  "
"blindness of his eyes, he could not tell. "
"""The one with the yellow stockings,"" said Bert. "
buttons on the doorstep. 
"     `Nearly, you say! ' said Gorbag. "
"     `No,  I  don't  think  so,'  answered Frodo.  'Even if he's up  to some "
"     `Now look here,  sir!  ' He turned, facing up  to Faramir with  all the "
"Fey Ebi,4824032472648,19-06-1981
"
see them has come true already?' he asked. 
"Well, they started the killing.' "
they could. 
"     `I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,' said "
"     `Let us rest as much  as  we can now,' said  Aragorn. `Tomorrow we must "
"Minas  Tirith,  standing as he used to  stand  upon  the  White Tower in the "
other matters with one care the less.  But you must be wary. The waters have 
through a high window  that looked on a vanished world. A light was  upon it 
void. Almost he fell sideways  into the emptiness. Here was some  opening in 
"and the cliff foot in  a couple of leaps. Before Gollum could get up, he was "
"     'I wish I could go all  the way  with  you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and "
ready  to  ride;  but Faramir  and Imrahil  remained  at  Edoras; and  Arwen 
"armed guards and tolls?"" And Smaug laughed aloud. He had a wicked and a wily "
"lawn, or pottering among the flowers, and that he had never heard  of Moria, "
routed and did not return. 
"Hillary Engledow,4041373782978,03-11-1982
"
"####-     `That I won't,'  said Sam. ` 'Twas  the eyes as made me sit  up,  so to "
hobbits and laughed. 
"     'It would  have been better,' said Strider. 'I would  have stopped your "
"ground among the burning houses. Their captain was Bard, grim-voiced and grim-"
"     `From Lurien,' said Frodo. 'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to "
debate. Sam's  guess was that  the Smjagol and Gollum halves (or what in his 
"shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and "
if I could. Let it go then!' 
"Hills,  and  on September the twenty-second  they rode gently down  into the "
"and  past  and  round  again,  though  all  had  been  drenched  with  water  before  he "
"said. ""I can smell the Wood-fires for the cooking."" "
"     'Then let  us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if  we can,'  said "
same moment they saw dark shapes coming  swiftly on the path from the fords.  
"Mortimer Ellingsworth,4041590273002611,13-04-1995
"
"     'It  is  tidings more grievous than any in  this  land can  understand, "
""
     `And what is it then? ' growled Shagrat. 
"looking  for you,  and  the  days  are running short. I was told to find you  "
"     At that  Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he roused "
"save  the Shire.  But I  feel very  small, and  very  uprooted,  and  well - "
slopes before them. 
the break of day?' 
"aloft, and from its tip there came  a faint radiance. The wide  stairway was "
"Caprice Lambdin,4017952336242628,16-07-1995
"
asleep. 
which  memory could  find   nothing  to  rest upon.  For two more nights they 
"     'So I thought too, once. But I have been too deeply hurt, Sam. I  tried "
miles the light  of them  lit the tower -top with a red glare.  Westward  the 
After  he  had  let  off  his  rage  in  this  way  he  felt  better  and  he  thought  in  his 
"Kipper Thacke,4041373530559,10-02-1995
"
sloth.' 
"     The morning came,  pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that "
by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with one large red eye in 
long  before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such 
dear old Will Whitfoot had another seven years of presiding at Banquets.  
"flapping feet on the rock. But if they halted  and  stood  still  listening, "
"     'But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you  have Men with you,' "
not yet agreed. And such a course  may be more perilous than  it sounds. The 
"     `Let go! Gollum,' he said. `This is Sting. You have seen it before once "
"we came to  Pelargir, and  there I heard them crying in the air as we rode to "
""
""
"     'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have "
Chapter 9. The Great River 
""
"The  dogs  could  stand  on  their  hind-legs  when  they  wished,  and  carry  things "
"Vale Prettjohn,4017956503882,22-04-1996
"
"     'This is idle talk,' said  Gandalf. 'Needless is Thjoden's demand,  but "
     `Yes? Now Boromir you would say?  ' said Faramir. `What would  you say?  
burglarious  proceedings  he  had  heard  of  picking  the  trolls'  pockets  seemed  the 
"     'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy  view.'  said  Shagrat. 'You can "
     The Company now gathered together  as close to the cliff as  they could. 
"The  terrors of  the land  beyond, and  the deed to  be  done there,  seemed "
####-nothing  left  to  eat  or  to  drink. Nothing wholesome  could  they  see  growing  in  the 
"into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a good "
"guessed  all that had been said.  Presently,  with a wave of his hand and  a  "
"near  to  open doors  and willow-cracks.  Tom  has  his house  to mind,  and  "
"""Is there no end to this accursed forest?"" said Thorin. "
"####-night-breeze,  or  so it's  said. Still  there's  one thing the fine fellows "
"country  of  safe  and  comfortable  things,  and  his  little  hobbit-hole. He shivered.  It "
I think. He is smaller than the other. And look at this! He held up a  thing 
from here. We must be there before noon.' 
"torment, those vermin  of orcs; and they came  over  the River a nd down from "
first  hint of grey light  under the skirts of the canopy of shadow they hid 
"     To this the king  assented, and the captains departed. But soon Elfhelm "
"Diane Brockbank,4041379556215458,24-02-1979
"
"reach was shattered, and the upper portion blew and swayed like a loose veil  "
"Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.' "
and fell to the ground in the midst of the Company. 
go. 
""
""
"Darby Kayne,4041596515894145,29-06-1988
"
"     If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even  more "
"     Faramir sat for a moment in thought. `Very good,' he  said at last.  `I  "
"as they were fond of doing, the stars shine out from the smooth patches of the lake "
"there was  no  sun  at  the  time  to  cast  an  awkward  shadow,  and  for  a mercy he did "
"outward, in token of pea ce; but the king's men gripped their weapons. At ten "
hobbits like riders upon errantry out of almost  forgotten tales. Even those 
"coming out of them. On and on he went, and down and down; and still he heard no "
"####-renowned or nameless, captain or  soldier; for it was a great battle and the "
"     Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo! "
"you  desire still to be near me. And maybe for both  these reasons,  and you  "
"     'Seems so,' said Sam. 'Well, we can but wait and see.' And with that he "
"     `All the same,' said Frodo, `I think  we could climb here; and  I think  "
set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy came 
"cringing  under  boulders,  hoping  somehow  to  escape  the  frightful  eyes  of  the "
"there  was a smooth space,  and over this he passed  his  hands to and  fro, "
and  far.  But here beside the  mound I will say this for your comfort: many 
"Camellia Cullinane,4710226690549427,01-08-1979
"
"you've got some rope in your pocket? If so, out with it! "
"the ground where they stood, he drove them forward. "
"####-name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment "
there 
"to have noticed it, as he wore it inside his breeches. "
"here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in this country, and only "
people; but the words of the song brought a light to the eyes of the folk of 
"Zara Folkerts,4017951341257308,27-05-1988
"
leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood and  see such trees as are 
by the way.  The  party was assailed by  Orcs in a  high pass  of  the Misty 
 
"""Yes,  it  is  rare  and wonderful,  indeed,""  said  Smaug  absurdly  pleased. He  did "
with you.' 
seen in the level plains.  
"Cirillo Mattersey,4041591673389,10-02-1992
"
"in the stone. At first they were no more than pale gossamer -threads, so fine "
     'Aragorn?' said Beregond. 'Who is he?' 
"And when you've finished, if any are whole, "
that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall  not forsake our old 
     `Which way do we go from here?' asked Frodo. `Is that the opening of-of 
"himself in the  stream. Then he  came up to them, licking  his lips. 'Better "
"overlapped, to  suppose that the movements of thought or the events of times "
"tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the "
"had foreseen how swift would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have "
"Marsiella Forseith,4425973617017,07-08-1993
"
"     'Well, Sam!' he said. 'What about it? I am leaving the Shire as soon as "
"me carry it a bit  for you, Master,' he said. 'You know I would, and gladly, "
"     'Hail, Lord  and Steward of Minas Tirith,  Denethor son of Ecthelion! I "
"shadow. It was shapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding "
"said Sam;  `but it  wouldn't do,  I  guess, to go  carrying his  tokens into "
with  one  remaining  instant in  which to  do so. He  took the Ring off his 
"be caught, and taken - for examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When "
our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep  watch at  the 
"Lesly Lakeland,4041370185694106,08-11-1989
"
"""I reckon you 're right,"" said Bert, ""and we'd best get out of the light."" "
thunderbolt. But he never leaped. 
"lead  now  -- if this last warning does not move you. It is  not of the Ring, "
"among  us that it should be made  again when the  Ring, Isildur's  Bane, was "
"""You've left the burglar behind again}"" said Nori to Dori looking down. "
"He stretched. 'Wake up, hobbits!' he cried. It's a beautiful morning.' "
"     `Well, I'm sick of him,' said Sam. `He's come once too often for me and "
answer dawned on Sam: the topmost chamber was reached  by a trap-door in 
"black and shapeless below where night lay thick and did not pass away, above "
came 
""
"before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work, "
"need to rouse  him.  Frodo was lying on his  back with eyes open, staring at "
Power would pass to us. That is in truth why I brought  you here. For I have 
""
"     'Farewell,  lord!' said  Aragorn.  'Ride unto great  renown!  Farewell, "
"have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had "
"like a discord on a great organ --  'these Orcs, and young Saruman  down  at "
them. coming out of the East across the Great River: their trail is plain to 
"     Sam sprang towards it. 'If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her!' "
peace. 
####-know how to enter? ' 
"Gracia Bewsy,4041595178393,05-11-1983
"
"Guy Halbeard,4453034750015,02-12-1997
"
""
think I could probably make some arrangements by then.' 
"but  the sound was faint,  as  if  it came out  of some  distant  cave. Then "
"is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we "
struggling  for life. In  the glens of the Morgai on the other  side  of the 
"song? and haven't we been talking about all this for hours?"" "
"Leigh Simcox,4185824361096,01-03-1977
"
"     Charging  from  the side,  they  hurled themselves  upon the  wild men. "
their courses converged with his.  
"     'I'll try,' said Sam, 'but when I think of  that Stinker I get so hot l "
"the third day, some miles up the river, they drew in to the left or western bank and "
"     At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all ready in "
     And Jomer answered: 'Since the day when you rose before me  out of  the 
to the special family dinner -party. This was held in the great pavilion with 
"'We  have  a  work  to  do,  and this is  no time or place  for riddling  or  "
stood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold 
"now, "
     They stood under the boughs  of the woods again. No noise  of the falls 
"Abraham Idiens,4041373416677650,31-01-1983
"
     'The Grey Pilgrim? ' said Frodo. 'Had he a name?' 
####-trouble! Tom's in a hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!' 
"pressed himself against the wall beside  the road. He was glad of the  Ring, "
behind 
"     `Why are you  so unfriendly? '  said Boromir. `I am a true man, neither  "
water. They rode down the  bank and looked up and down. There was nothing 
men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold  to join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make 
"Jess Cockarill,4041593120459588,21-10-2001
"
"seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.' "
"silver, and jools, by what I've heard. ' "
"is on it.  Rich are  the hours,  though short they  seem, in Caras Galadhon, "
himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.' 
"angry trolls (and two with burns and bashes to remember) sitting by them, arguing "
the  history  of  the War  of  the Ring was so  called because it  was  long 
"Russ Deem,4041374348712,28-07-2001
"
"leave  Bag End  soon, and get out of the  Shire before  the  end  of July at "
"Lorena Follitt,4041596582809,24-02-1979
"
"Cindelyn Klemenz,4041593368733918,20-01-1984
"
other. 
"they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim. "
seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had once been  strong and full.  
not wish to  lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he knew that he 
guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire 
"perhaps  sent  her a present,  a  prisoner  of  war  or  something. I  don't "
"Baryram Bridgman,4041379278203,04-08-1977
"
afflicted  them  before. From sun  and  moon and star  they  had  been  safe 
"""Confusticate  and  bebother  these  dwarves!""  he  said  aloud.  ""Why  don't  they "
"     'Grievous is our loss,'  said Legolas.  'Yet we must needs make up  our "
well  contented  and  they  quickly  grew  fat  and  strong  again.  Indeed within  a week 
Which will prove the swifter? 
     Sam  sat on  the  ground and  put his head in his hands. `I  wish I had 
"right above him, on the left hand of the Cleft. "
"isn't safe  for us  both to sleep  together,  and begging your pardon, but I "
"halfling into the land of the Enemy himself, as you  have done, and this son "
secret  any  longer?  Old  Smaug  had  lived  there  long  enough  now  to  find  out 
food  deserved no better  setting. The travellers  were  glad  to  leave the 
to pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten their road home?' He looked at 
"Loralie Ruler,4041377739575111,11-11-1983
"
####- 
Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered 
"Beatriz Vallender,4017952045714,25-05-1983
"
jug! Come  give  us  a  taste  of  your  sleeping-draught before we  fall  to! No need  to 
"perilous night,  and I  must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if "
"they  shouted, and they  hammered  joyously  on the tables.  Bilbo was doing "
"Then  the great  spider, who had been busy  tying him up while he dozed, came "
snuffling nose.' 
"gathered by hill  and valley, going  ever by  tunnel or under dark, until  around  and "
"     `I thought they were all destroyed in the flood,' said Merry. "
"####-     'Then in the name of the  king, go  and find some old man  of less lore "
as long as I have any strength. ' 
"his  hands  slipping  off  the  slimy  roots  at  the  edge,  while  the  boat  span  slowly  off "
""
"Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and "
stand; then he  whistled.  Three  dwarves came out of  different rooms where 
"     'And Gandalf said: ""The Ring has passed on,  Bilbo. It would do no good "
stream. 
"had  come  all  the way  from  the Mountain and from Dale, and  were of real "
""
"     'Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,' said Gimli. "
"Denyse Eringey,4041373768688,30-05-1982
"
"big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked "
"Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path,  "
"woods or secret glade to catch, maybe, a glimpse of the great Oliphaunt. And "
"surface of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great holes, as if, while "
do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached 
stuck. Let's go off into a corner and polish it up!' 
"     'Naked I was sent back -- for a brief time, until my task  is done. And "
from  Rivendell to look  for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the 
"     `Mithril!  All  folk desired it.  It could be  beaten  like copper, and "
"doesn't answer, then we does what it wants, eh? We shows it the way out, yes!"" "
     The light grew clearer as they  went forward. Suddenly they came out of 
"     He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets,   and fought off "
"first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.' "
"now  simply  stamping  with  impatience  down  below,  reminded  him  of  his  real "
"and the  coming of the orcs:  they fear lest the Dark Years be returning, as "
"two-feather hobbit: 'You're arrested for  Gate-breaking,  and  Tearing up of "
"and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly, riding now upon the "
the  black fleet.  They  are sparing only a tithe  of  their strength. Still 
stealing  their  treasure.  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  the  dwarves  gave  a  different 
"head  with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag  - Underhill,  sir,' he added with  a  "
"     'The Ents are safe,' said Pippin. 'He seems  at one  time to  have  got "
     Steeds went striding to the Stoningland 
stuff. 
followed.  Merry  then  pushed slowly off with  a  long pole. The Brandywine 
     his boat it bore with biting breath  
"""But  it  is  the  last  road,""  said  Bilbo.  They  came  to  the  river  that  marked  the "
"     'Don't make jokes about it,' hissed Gollum.  `It isn't funny, O no! Not "
"Ema Tortoise,4017959560935330,25-08-1983
"
"     All  at  once, when he felt that he could pump out no more  breath, nor  "
"and he dragged along, slower and slower, so that Sam had often to beg Gollum "
fireside far away. These  four now  suddenly remembered what the joy of this 
ruffians have joined up with them. There must be close on a hundred of them; 
"place, Jomer, that my sword-thain could use?' "
"guards Frodo could see no sign. The  travellers passed within, and the gates "
"me, and so I'm better off than you. There must be food and  water  somewhere "
     The old  man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to 
"Tabbie Sackler,4041596653469,10-09-1994
"
been forgotten. I have  heard of  the Great Ring of him that we do not name;  
You  know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if 
"are you and where do you come from, may I ask?"" "
"dragon-fire could melt and consume the Rings  of Power, but there is not now "
"Gollum  sat  with his legs drawn up, knees  under chin, flat hands  and feet "
"     'Yes,'  said Gandalf,  'that  was Gwaihir the Windlord,  who rescued me "
"####-black marble, they  rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of "
"Mora Ingleston,4017957974835,12-07-1999
"
     Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 
"Tabatha Swaile,4041599425964,21-02-1987
"
"some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.' "
     'Don't!'  said  Pippin.  'But  tell  them up  there that I have a  sick  
"blackness of night, when  suddenly out  sprang  the  light of many  torches  all  round "
me 
slow care that it had given to its own inside affairs for endless years.' 
"busied  themselves. All the stone-circle had been  thrown down and  removed, "
went on raining. 
voice rang out. 
"Brittney Bennington,4041599523103129,09-02-1983
"
"North-West  of the  Old World, east of  the Sea. Of their original home  the "
"     'That  can't  be helped,' said another. 'But why not kill  them  quick, "
"Chantalle Ponceford,4017956321442,05-12-1983
"
"     'I haven't any courage to  keep up,'  said Frodo, `but I am not worried "
galloped off down the  lane that led south to Cotton's.  He had not gone far 
"can ride openly  against  the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond  sent out "
precious -- it hurts our eyes.' 
knocking it on the stone. Crack! Crack! 
""
Cair Andros. The hobbits wandered here  and there visiting again the  places  
"expected  him  to  think  of  some  wonderful  plan  for  helping  them,  and  were  not "
on him. What did  the  rest sit on? They were not  forgotten. The other ponies came 
"shaking and  the bumping  they would get  inside,  though Bilbo did his best  to  find "
"     'Yes, it is  all  very  dim,  and stuffy,  in   here,' said Pippin.  'It "
"treasure more perilous, nor  less easy to pan with. 'None  at all,' he said. "
"the door. Then they thrust upon it, and it closed with a snap and a clang. No trace "
"They  all  looked,  and  a  longish  way  off,  it  seemed,  they  saw  a  red  twinkle  in "
"     'Orc-gear's no  good,' said Sam, waving his  arms. 'I  wish I'd  got  an "
"window and listened,  because he could  not get news in any  other  way, and "
"     `I  wish I had taken Elrond's advice,' muttered Pippin to Sam. `I am no "
only waited  your  chance to  leave  us  in  the  lurch. Curse  you and  all 
decided in  the end that they would have to camp where they were. So far they had 
unless they had been made prisoners by the elves (or worse things). 
spring: then  he stooped  and  splashed  his  feet  and head with water;  he 
"all folk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred  "
the ground. 
""
"Aloysia Peartree,4041379672492288,15-11-1991
"
passed. 
of the  king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate 
"of  it went away down the  old road out of the Southfarthing, over Sarn Ford "
"weariness may ha ve  no cure,  is quite another  - even if they are willing to "
"dreary, and Frodo remembered little  of it, save the wind. For many  sunless "
     `A dwarf! '  said Haldir. `That  is not well. We have not had  dealings 
"rider  had  reined in  his horse and halted, looking  up towards the thicket "
Baggins became once again the  chief  topic of  conversation; and the  older  
going to do? He won't be able to do anything for himself.' 
or difficulty the next day. 
heirs' as long as my line shall last. Do now thy office!' 
"that  he  just  rolled off  the branch  and  fell plop on  to  the ground,  fortunately on  to "
"longed for the  sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, "
"Monica Aslam,4669833029851,30-08-1980
"
their parting gift  of spoons. It did  not improve their tempers. Eventually 
"     'And you, Master Dwarf, pray  take your hand from your axe-haft, till I "
"     `At once  I took my leave of  Denethor, but even as  I went northwards, "
"     There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and "
stony  gate it flowed out and passed into a wider vale. The Riders  followed 
"Neville Heinicke,4017957006848224,22-10-1982
"
know how long it is since we left Lurien.' 
it was  the time o'  the  year. I'll bet there's all sorts  of  good  things 
     'A letter for me from Gandalf!' cried Frodo. 
"expected: a tangle of thorny bushes.  There Sam  lay still, softly sucking a  "
"     'I do,' said Merry. "
steps: the heaviest and the most reluctant he had ever taken. 
"preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments, yea, and on stone, "
"     `We are  lost, lost,' said  Gollum. 'No name, no business, no Precious, "
"in  rolling  round  drum-shaped  sections  of  logs,  smoothed  and  polished,  and  low "
     Then Gandalf and Beregond taking  up the bier bore  it away towards the 
"grinding upon its hinges: it  had great iron rings on either side, but could "
"     'We have drunk  the cup of  parting,' she  said, `and the  shadows fall "
truth. 
"thinning. They kept as  close as they could  to  the western  side, and they "
close. 
"in which  there was a shallow cave,  a  mere scoop in the  cliff.  Frodo was "
of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None 
"looked back. He could still see, like a small blot in  the gathering  gloom, "
     'What  the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot  
"himself  again. Frodo, neither  the  Voice nor the Eye: free to choose,  and "
"     Many, however, may wish to know more about  this remarkable people "
     `Wait a  moment! Do not close it yet! ' said Gandalf. He sprang forward 
"In former days the members  of my order  had been  well received  there, but "
"naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or without  it.  But "
heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream. 
"####-Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley, while in Minas Tirith flames were rising "
Even Sauron was not so. I fear to  take the Ring to hide it. I will not take 
a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When 
without any markings to be seen. 
"have an honest reason  for spying  and eavesdropping;  but  if so,  I should "
"lucky, and find out all about it As I was saying I met two of Elrond's people. They "
"     'It is  still  far  away,'  said Aragorn. 'If I remember rightly, these "
""
"     A long-tilted  valley, a  deep gulf of shadow,  ran back far  into  the "
"and they preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, heavier  "
"to us.  They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and "
"here we must  part. Well, I must eat a little, and  then we also must hast en "
away. 
know?' 
"Dew Fairbanks,4041371107745786,03-12-1993
"
"the air, and then he would mutter to himself and urge them to greater speed.  "
"wielding  great  powers. King, Ringwraith,  Lord of the Nazgyl, he  had many "
"     'That  will  not  be far to seek,' said  Gandalf, rising from his seat. "
"he  does  not know that Men are concealed here.  For another, I think  he is "
and look at this place while you may!' 
"have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of course, has long "
no 
gollum. He musstn't go that  wa y. He  musstn't hurt  Preciouss. Give  it  to 
"And, of course, I make  up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to "
from Gondor that the Dark Lord is stirring in the East. Such  is the hour in 
"     `I daresay,' said Sam. 'But where have you been to  -- sneaking off and "
""
Emyn 
and 
     Afore I found his shinbone. 
"the gardens  now and again. Then when the  Darkness came  in  the North, the "
"Bobbye Buntine,4041378959746,28-10-1997
"
     'Your  news is all of woe!' cried Jomer in dismay. 'Great harm is  this 
no longer matched by his old griping strength. Frodo flung him off and  rose 
river  rushed  into  the  Long  Lake.  There  it  had  a  wide  mouth  with  stony  clifflike 
an unaccountable desire seized hold of him to rush out and reveal himself and tell 
"City, until you were  healed and refreshed. Now  you shall rest, and we will "
"days  from  Weathertop,  for  I  could  not  ride  among  the rocks  of  the "
the weather and the high  pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was 
walk from the Water to the River in peace?' 
"""Come  along  in,  and  have  some  tea!""  he  managed  to  say  after  taking  a  deep "
"Gamaliel MacGuigan,4017950123933268,26-12-1990
"
"comfortable here, and getting  on  with my  book.  If you want to know, I am "
"is more or less the way towards the place where we last saw the elf-fires."" "
"vision  as it  were of a  great expanse of  years  behind them,  like a vast  "
"     `I was afraid for  you, Frodo,' he said, coming forward. `If Aragorn is "
"above  a great cloud streamed slowly westward from the Black Land, "
"peering in  the water as the dark  eve  fell, I  caught  him, Gollum. He was "
"loved the great trees; and the wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills; "
"even one of Rohan that fights  with  us, sha ll  see the path we now  go with "
"himself with his pans. `What a hobbit needs with coney,' he said to himself,  "
"behind him, while Denethor gave back until he stood beside the table within. "
"Florri Pycock,4041376776787,28-05-1997
"
"     Glorfindel  was tall and straight;  his  hair was of shining gold,  his "
next that he was hundreds of miles from  Bag End. He sat up. It seemed to be 
"""Bilbo  Baggins!""  he  said.  ""You  are  more  worthy  to  wear  the  armour  of  elf-"
Bombur  kept  on wailing  that  his  legs would  not  carry  him  and  that  he wanted  to 
"Ave Domenc,4041371475637516,05-04-1992
"
terms and  doom Frodo  to the torment  of  the  Tower;  but  he had mastered  
"but here you may pass  the night in peace. It is dry at least,  and there is "
"Chelsey Hanse,4041592553622,03-12-1991
"
"Florian Simchenko,4041377543699,01-11-1984
"
"Hale Lemin,4041377595523957,22-07-1989
"
Rivendell that soon all  fear  and anxiety was lifted  from their minds. The 
by  land  to  the place where  the barrels were collected. He wondered what on earth 
blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the  fireless  cave. The  noise of  the 
"Rodrick Maxted,4041594960353,14-02-1981
"
the  road  again.  They  had  not  gone far before the sun  sank  behind the 
"     'We  did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking  at the gates. Their "
Trumpets  called  men  and  elves  to  arms.  Before  long  the  dwarves  could  be  seen 
shape of an orc  coming out. He seemed to be carrying a ladder. Suddenly the 
stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead. 
companion of Mithrandir. Many used some other tongue than the Common 
####- 
"guessed that they were  now in the  same  region, and wondered if by  chance "
"Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!' "
and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas and Gimli. Then suddenly 
"     'Nay!  There is no  time,' said the Elf. 'Do  not spoil the wonder with "
"are  usually  untidy  and  dirty.  Hammers,  axes,  swords,  daggers,  pickaxes,  tongs, "
"had  utterly  overthrown the front of  his enemies, and  great wedges of his "
Ghvn. 'Drive away bad air and darkness with bright iron!' 
"return. In fact, I don't mean to, and I have made all arrangements. "
""
"that they found abroad, living or  dead. The numbers that had already passed  "
 
Gandalf. With a  cry Saruman fell back  and crawled away.  At that  moment a  
opening.  It was probably only meant to be a stop against the  intrusion  of 
"up,  in  ranks  and  companies glittering  in  the  sun.  And as the Hobbits "
"Celestyna Sadgrove,4017953321668,12-12-1996
"
"Frederik Matuska,4041595065292346,25-02-1984
"
"bright stars peered out of the sky, and lit the falling water as  it spilled "
"     'It will be short of murder, I hope,' said Gandalf. He laid his hand on "
cloud the surface of the Mirror. 
"South and East and West, for word has gone out that Smaug is dead!"" "
"seen  it  at  all,  even  from  this  distance.  Dreary  as  had  been  his  imprisonment and "
"     'We came down  over  the last  ridge  into Nan Curunnr, after night had "
"There some paces from him sat the great beast, and all seemed dark about it, "
"lower windows. They rang the bell, and Nob came to the door, and opened it a  "
"Conn Speck,4041378814073,19-06-1994
"
and joy. 
"the  hobbit's throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to  his feet, Merry "
"     Soon he had passed, like a shadow  into shadow, down  the winding road, "
escape: they had already hewn down three Riders that barred their way. 
"     So  the  desperate  journey  went  on, as the Ring went  south and  the "
"'we'll see. It may well be, O yes, it may well be  that when She throws away "
"     'They are  far far away,' he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. 'I know in "
"     'A nasty drop, I'll bet,' said Sam. "
"rightly  understand,  about an  enemy, and  rings, and  Mr. Bilbo, sir,  and "
     `I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torment. And I 
bound wood. 
that Aragorn insisted  on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it 
"their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end of the Mark "
"     ' ""That may be so,"" he said, ""but the thought is late in coming to you. "
cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken 
 
"Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle.' "
"of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about "
a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!' 
"Essy Norcliff,4017958789591098,11-07-1988
"
stood  revealed upon the battlements;  and the men of the Mark amazed looked 
     Their plumes of blinding spray. 
would hardly  need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely  
####-easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while Merry and Pippin were 
"to  withstand the  Nine,  when they  are gathered together under  their fell "
which the road clove its way through a stony  ridge. Now they climbed up the 
"sheltering bank, a man fell, crashing through  the slender trees,  nearly on "
"paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round. "
"glass  upon a far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from a  "
     The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their 
The afternoon was turning into evening when he came out again and stumbled 
     Gandalf laughed. 'A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a  
"Teresa Shand,4041377078494411,25-01-1996
"
And listen and hark 
"other part, perhaps, he's just biding his time and waiting on chance.' "
"Grethel Frediani,4041370459468054,14-10-1981
"
""
shadows  looked  across the plain to  the door  that he had  made;  and  the 
grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?' 
soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf's absence. The dining-room was 
"hunting. Gimli had  his axe in hand,  and  Legola s  his long knife:  all his "
or not? And what would you give for it?' 
him.' 
buttresses  and  broken hills  that were now at the nearest  scarce a  dozen 
     'Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone amiss.  
"that at the time he  did not  understand  himself, at the beginning of their "
"     'You will be let  alone, Barliman,' said Gandalf. 'There is room enough "
"as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could see him not far off, a small but upright "
steadily  and  keeping  in  the  same  direction  in  spite  of  a  twist  and  a  turn  or  two. 
"over this more than anything else. For  one thing, this hurt would take long "
"into  decay,  were  repaired, and  filled  with arms,  and  garrisoned  with "
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with 
willingly. and so saving yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is 
"the Shire-folk, when they arise from  their quiet fields to shake the towers "
to  climb  down  out  of  a  thorn-bush.  Then  Bilbo  understood.  It  was  the  wizard's 
The others looked at him in surprise. 
"ye  have  taken:  now fulfil them  all,  to  lord  and  land  and league  of "
""
"on  his finger,  he  vanished  from Sam's sight.  Sam gasped,  but he had no "
     'Good tidings!' cried Jomer. 'Even in this gloom hope gleams again. Our 
Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest 
"Enos Boards,4763204559289,19-01-1979
"
"     The Company now turned aside from the path, and  went into the shadow of "
     Frodo bent his head. `And what do you wish? ' he said at last. 
""
"     Taking in folk off-hand like and eating extra food, and  all that, said "
in a chair by the open window.  
"     'I know  only the little that Gandalf has  told me,' said Frodo slowly. "
     Frodo  looked straight into Gollum's eyes  which  flinched  and twisted 
"     'Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the "
"silver horn he winded it, and its clear call rang  over the Hill; and out of "
stars  opened in  the hard black vault above. So the  night passed. Together  
And empty holes it fills. 
"we wants it. The thieves, the thieves, the filthy  little thieves. Where are "
"comfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to "
"Gabi Bickell,4017952012110,29-03-2000
"
branches. More  promising still (to the hobbits' mind): an enormous open-air  
"us closely.' Merry  and Pippin looked at Frodo,  who  was  staring  into the "
"fiery underneath and moonlit above. And still more water poured in, until at "
their origin. They  were  taller and darker  than the  Men of Bree  and were 
"year of the  Third Age  that the  Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set "
"Temple Putman,4017952067460,01-08-1976
"
"despair at last, hiding the ir eyes from death. "
     and flame was in the darkness lit; 
ill aimed.' 
"mutton and other plunder, they waited in the shadows. As each dwarf came up and "
""
out will be shot.' 
trees were loo close for them to see far  ahead.  The leaves blew upwards in 
"round  the  tree-trunks.  Others  rushed  round  and  stamped  and  beat,  and  beat  and "
floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end. 
"Helsa Shiliton,4041593289205970,08-03-1985
"
"came to a trial and nothing else would serve, I might have  to kill you. For  "
"Alessandro Danzelman,4298416393611448,28-09-1976
"
"words, for it is long since war  has driven  us from  the green fields;  but "
####-given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which  
"bay. A  few low  trees grew there close to the water, and behind them rose a  "
"Alix Perham,4538690363663,14-05-1997
"
"down on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight,  and then he sat down beside "
"your own that  you  became  embroiled in them, and so I will  not blame such "
messengers will ride up the Greenway now not bullies from Isengard. ' 
"and such great lords, not to  mention Strider, should take so  much  trouble "
came on without any precautions. Merry laid his plans quickly. 
"     'No, more's the pity,' said Cotton. 'There's a  good few down south  in "
"""And  that's  just  what  you  wouldn't  have  got  of  those  fellows  without  a "
"Beacon, a tall  hill standing up from  the long ridges of the Dr®adan Forest  "
""
doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind it all. Such things are not often 
     At first he could see little. He seemed  to be in a  world of  mist  in 
"across the River, but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from "
hardly  to  be seen  among  the  stones. There were  bottles and  bowls  and 
"was still  no sign of orcs, nor  of  an answer to the cry of the Nazgyl; but "
come to  the battle?  I  wish  I  could  walk and  not  bump like a sack  at 
he smeared the wound with some dark  stuff out of a small wooden  box. Merry 
"Grace Fuidge,4017954826673,11-10-1975
"
"haste, remember the Paths of the Dead. ' "
"Victor Moyles,4041599834665204,22-12-1988
"
"things are amiss in these dreadful days, what with  fires and  burnings, and "
"not release it. And time went  by and  still he knelt, holding  his master's "
""
"     'But it was not  coming  for me, was  it?' faltered Pippin. 'I mean, it "
each  with a  clasp wrought like a golden flower. To Legolas she  gave a bow 
 
"     She  did not answer, but  as  he looked  at her it  seemed to  him that "
"Cobby Boxhall,4017951842306877,08-07-1980
"
"     At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again, louder now "
passing and  not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and  were  no  
The Last Stage 
     In the green fields of Lebennin! 
 
as  he wandered  away  into  the  vast  hall;  then  it  began  to  rise  dancing  into  the  air. 
"     ` ""I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news  of a  "
"Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?' "
"     'He did  not make it up,' said Strider. 'It  is pan of the lay  that is "
and  many eyes were turned  t= Elrond in  fear and wonder as he  told of the 
"Mae Wyborn,4672029272814,02-02-1995
"
     Sam looked and breathed in  sharply through his teeth. `Ssss!' he said. 
that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance  that old wives 
"steerless,  bereft of will, wavered and  despaired. For they were forgotten. "
"dark in the abyss before my feet, but whether there is any light behind me I "
And when the time  came that in the  custom of the Mark they should drink to 
"     'And now for our  manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the "
thinking.  But what's  the black  sneak got to do with  it all? That gobbler  
"quite dark. So  you shall tell me how you know, a nd all about what happened. "
"shining crown and seven glittering stars. On the throne sat a mail-clad man, "
"Jo ann Lace,4707458390099,02-09-1997
"
"     Darkness came early  to the silent  woods, and before the fall of night "
"where the  trolls' gold  was  hidden.  How much is  left of Bilbo's share, I "
"orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take it.' "
with a score of his fellows to  back  him.  He knew too little of hobbits to 
"long  delay  him  now,  and  he  thought  always  of  his  own  home.  After  a  week, "
"fifty-one  then,  and birthdays did  not seem so important.  The banquet was  "
pounded to death by galloping hoofs!' 
"     `Well,' said Aragorn, `I can only say that hobbits are made of  a stuff "
"     he rode singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. "
"went on beyond the end of the southern spur, until lying hidden behind a rock they "
"     `Hullo, Sam! ' he said. `Not resting? Is  anything wrong?  What  is the "
####-of course his special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between 
"     'A great Shadow  has departed,' said  Gandalf, and then he  laughed and "
away-and have you all to myself!' 
These were in fact already standing in rows in the middle of the floor waiting to be 
watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain  are of  Saruman's 
"tunnel, not  west. Out westward in the world it was drawing to noon upon the "
"Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling rock -wall, and to their left mist "
"     'We  have all been  scared,' said Pippin after a pause,  in which Frodo "
"####-the dingle, and as many more were marching in. "
in at many points. And I came chiefly to say this. Soon there will be battle 
"run clean  again."" He began  to pull  down  a bit  more of  the walls,  in a  "
And grass beneath the sun; 
lucky 
"""Exactly!"" said Thorin; ""but could you be more plain?"" "
"behind  him,  that their vigilance was  renewed. And  from  those evil heads "
"guess."" "
####-time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his  journey 
"Eryn Campey,4017959525866,26-08-1979
"
and replenish our supplies. But in the meanwhile everyone ought to be well inside 
"     Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were  got ready, and "
"Mountain's  root.  It  is  almost  dark  so  that  its  vastaess  can  only  be  dimly  guessed, "
until all your wounds and weariness  are hea led. But wear this now in memory 
again. 
""
""
"this  is not my adventure.  I may  look  in on  it again before  it  is all over, but  in  the "
"     'There  are  hobbits in Bree,'  said Merry,  'as well as  Big  Folk.  I "
"Reinold Bosward,4022829947050116,15-04-2000
"
"Ends life, kills laughter.  "
"     'But Aragorn  halted and cried with a great voice:  ""Now  come!  By the "
"     Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I  think we will not speak "
springs of Kibil-nvla. My  heart trembles at the thought that I may see them 
"miles away, and yet-and yet somehow he could not go straight back to Thorin and "
"Bebe Le Marchant,4041598281842779,14-04-1975
"
"ago they  attacked the Hedge: they came and  planted themselves right by it,  "
Sauron came to Middle-earth. To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the  stones 
'though it comes to my  ears that that lie has been told. Some years ago the 
"Charyl Fridaye,4849504351822380,02-02-1988
"
and mounting rode away into battle. 
"Romain Brandenburg,4017951481652961,04-02-1999
"
you should not go telling just anybody. You'll be letting out your own right 
Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing 
"cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!' "
"hurried  a  little,  getting  as  close  as  he  dared  behind  Gollum,  who  was  still  going "
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed 
"     He ceased, but  at once Boromir  stood up, tall and proud, before them. "
"Enemy  from  his  throne, and took  from  his  iron  crown one of the  three "
"     So it  was  that  they did not sec  the  last  stand,  when  Ugl®k  was "
be sure of  peace.  For we are come now to  the edge of doom. Here those who 
"are Orcs there,  it may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs "
"Granny Denniss,4041591146344628,11-09-1985
"
no sign. Frodo looked troubled.  
"     'All  the same,'  said  Sam,  'you can't deny  that others besides  our "
     As soon as she had  squeezed her  soft  squelching  body and its folded 
"or no. Nar! Keep your hands off your knife,  or I'll  put  an arrow  in your "
at first all was dark  ahead; but soon Frodo  saw a tall gap of light before 
"     'Very well,' said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo  with all the rest.' He drew "
"Loleta Hinze,4041599580679268,28-02-1985
"
"refilled the  bottle,  and turned  to go back.  At that  moment he caught  a  "
"####-howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer and "
"     The world is grey, the mountains old, "
"     'I  can't  believe  that  Gollum  was  connected with  hobbits, however "
"trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it, "
"""Hear, hear!"" cried Bilbo, and flung himself on the ground. "
"He had a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, a silver scarf over which a white "
little of Elves and  Men. Far away  are the valleys where they sprang.  From 
day.' 
"Beniamino Arndt,4041591022843,24-08-1982
"
killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent ominous vigil. 
and  cold deathly light it  seemed  unbearably violent  and fierce. Peaks of 
if you  would very much mind  tidying things up a bit before you go? Collect 
shall not forget you.' 
evening of peace at least is left us. Let us ride on! ' 
thick; siege-towers crashed or blazed  suddenly like torches. All before the 
"save  by a narrow stair of many  thousand steps, and  the valley below seems "
"she looked on the king with cool  pity in her eyes. Very fair was  her face, "
can be sure of that.' 
     The morning was now far advanced. From  the high place they looked back  
"wriggling like an eel, biting  and  scratching like  a cat. But two more men "
"     And as for Frodo, he would  not speak, though  Boromir pressed him with "
"resolved  to stay  with the rearguard,  lest  the retreat over  the Pelennor  "
even felt  in his pocket with his other hand. There he found  the ring he had picked 
"blade  in  his hand.  'Lie quiet, or  I'll tickle you with this,' he hissed. "
Mordor. 
"####-     Frodo looked at Sam. 'Yes sir,' he said. `I did use the word, waking up "
Fa-la-la-lally 
"the whole of the low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors,  "
dead; and even  as Gandalf  came to the end of Rath Dnnen there was a  great 
and 
have great power.' 
"would have been a heavy blow to us, and it might have been fatal. But let us "
"business it was. Even I, Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to save your father, but "
"wolves. Suddenly  a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the "
arisen again.  Smoke  rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount 
commanded this halfling here to keep silence? That you brought him hither to 
"Helsa Bonifazio,4631550052367,27-12-1998
"
"     of times there were before, "
"     'Stay here, and do not  go to  your rooms! They are sure  to have found "
"begin  at once, and wait for none that tarry. Have  you good  store in Minas "
hours of a  sombre day were passing; the red glare of Mordor had died away in 
     Jomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast down  his 
the 
sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us  they 
with the living.' 
     Pass them by! Pass them by! 
"doors, that hung twisted on their hinges and half burnt. "
"better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be dark. But I shall "
     and Stars for ever dwell: 
""
"his  sword. 'Quick, Master!' he gasped. 'Go on! Go on! No time to lose. I'll "
"Gandalf was as astonished as any of  them, but probably more pleased than all the "
"said Ioreth. 'Well, if your lordship had named it at first I could have told "
"want to see my gaffer. D'you know what's come of him, Mr. Cotton?' "
"Dreddy Andreucci,4041599785421680,19-06-1975
"
     they gnaws our feet. 
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders;  her  gown was 
all  the  mountains  there  was  a  forging  and  an  arming.  Then  they  marched  and 
     It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres 
"dreams. It was long after the break of day, when he woke up. "
was always one for  hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo  as taught  me  my 
"hadn't waked up, we should have left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest; you "
"hand  would  not  close  about  it  for  it  was  a  large  and  heavy  gem;  but  he  lifted  it, "
"     'And I would give  gold to be excused,' said Legolas; 'and double to be "
"""Who shall we sit on first?"" said the voice. "
"of  beautiful  and marvellous  things,  before  some  came  back  into  the Wide World. "
"ran, his slaves quailed, and his armies  halted,  and his captains  suddenly "
     'Don't say such things!' said Frodo. 'It only makes it  worse.' Then he 
""
"     When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the West, "
"afar thought that  the  mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard, "
him lightly up. 
This is what he read: 
Riders stirred the hearts even of those who did not  know the speech of that 
"Ellissa Tax,4041373780922930,26-07-1981
"
"####-journey.  This  was  much  as  it  had  been  before,  except  that  the  company  was "
little strength. Things have gone evilly since Thjodred fell. We were driven 
     Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of Rohan that 
his 'coming of age'.  
"""Would  this  be  any  good?""  asked  Bilbo,  when  they  were  getting  tired  and "
"Ivy Duxfield,4041371774613,02-05-1985
"
"then  with a shriek he fell. Out of the depths came  his last wail Precious, "
"""Good heavens!"" growled Beorn. ""Don't pretend that goblins can't count. They "
"you  will  see,  if  we  ever  get  to  the  end  of  it.  His  house  was  perfect,  whether  you "
"     In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast, "
"     'I guess what it'll be like,' said  Sam. 'Where it's narrower the  Orcs "
"except a sense  of  dread. Then  suddenly  he  knew  that he was imprisoned, "
in like kind. I  cannot remember that he ever told.  me anything. And he got 
"used  to  having  it  delivered  by  the  butcher  all  ready  to  cook.  Gandalf,  too,  was "
"Orson Pothbury,4017953669371,29-11-1993
"
not see why he should come riding over my land so bold. 
"sweeping the  fen-reek with its ghastly wings. And then  it was gone, flying "
"""Oh  well,  if  it's  a  matter  of  ordinary  questions,""  Bilbo  replied,  ""then  I  asked "
"Leonhard Mirralls,4046322663774806,13-09-1998
"
"said Gandalf, `and I desired  to know how this thing came to Gollum, and how "
with brooding thought. 
he was clothed in flame: his naked skin was scarlet in the light of the lamp 
must be protected.  I  would not have us return  with victory  to a City  in 
""
"Off we go, or a whole lake of it won't do us any good!' "
"Manon Abade,4017958413630841,08-07-1994
"
They  begged  him  not  to  leave  them. They  offered  him  dragon-gold and silver 
which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had 
more clearly than many  that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that 
"horns of silver, and clear-voiced singers from the vales of Lebennin. "
"go also. Yet for a  while I stand in the place of the Steward of Gondor, and "
stooping  so that he peered into their  faces. 'You shall come home with me!  
them. 
rash words concerning such things as  -- heirlooms.' 
"""Curse  it!  curse  it!  curse  it!""  hissed  Gollum.  ""Curse  the  Baggins!  It's  gone! "
 
dismally real that Bilbo was forced to believe the party of the night before had not 
can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes round  the north  end of 
""
"the words of Saruman; and then they too were silent,  as men spell-bound. It  "
level of the Gates now.  Soon I think we should look for  a left -hand turn to 
     Then  Aragorn entered first and the  others followed. And there  at the 
     'The Ents!' exclaimed  Aragorn. 'Then there is truth in the old legends 
"Lynnett Cullimore,4356846383081575,26-06-1994
"
"that we love into all that  we make. Yet they  are garments, not armour, and "
"sticking  out  of  black  shadows.  Summer  or  not,  it  seemed  very  cold.  He  shut  his "
"with him again. But  I cannot see him from afar,  unless he comes within the "
 
"house of Elrond  Halfelven, and  breathe the  air  of that deep valley where "
crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the 
and  little more in all the  days of Denethor?  But no! I sa id this would be 
left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them 
"back, and I'll run over it. I won't be too critical.' "
"     'Well,  we've  got you  with us,' said Merry,  'so things  will soon be "
itself  in their thought into words which they only partly understood.  This 
"     Behind,  the trapped Men in the lane,  still about four score, tried to "
"the  night. This was the second, no, the third night since  he had looked in "
this deadly dark? ' 
"towards the slopes of the mountains, deeper and deeper into  Fangorn. Slowly "
"and the Eye of Sauron, I thought, should be drawn out from his own land. Too "
great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood 
smouldering reek. 
shot with glints of the rainbow.  
"might not be, that  he should  go alone and  take  it from the hands  of his "
"Roman Connock,4041592360580,06-08-1994
"
"down  full  of  despair.  He  got  to  the  bottom  again  at  last  scratched,  hot,  and "
"""Now we had this all out before, when we landed on the Carrock,"" he said. ""It "
     'That may be. I will  do as you ask. Call  Hbma to  me. Since he proved 
from the mountains ahead. 
     'Why? Where are you going?' asked Frodo. 
"moment  all the hosts of Mordor trembled, doubt clutched their hearts,  their "
let Him  have  it.  Never! Smjagol will save  it. But  he  must swear on the 
"whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down "
"     'I won't  argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much music "
him; but the great grey shapes moved steadily onward. There was a noise like 
"'But dawn will not help us, I fear.' "
"glimpse of high white peaks, glimmering like floating isles above the clouds "
"Emeline Bassick,4041376567248015,05-11-1988
"
should find  three  and  a half thousands;  and Jomer  five  hundreds  of the 
hunters now.' 
as gloomy as the dying day. 
they took out their knives. 
"     o menel palan-diriel, "
""
"Entwash flowed to meet them, its  stream now swift and narrow, and its banks "
"good-bye.  You  meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come  on "
"with me, while you have a chance, go away, and come back when you are "
Sting;  and  hundreds  of  angry  spiders were  goggling  at  them  all  round  and  about 
"Graig Salman,4017950161455,02-09-1990
"
Lurien upon  the finger of Galadriel  that one of the Three remains. This is 
"stumbled until  they were weary, they were creeping forward like snails, and  "
"world was wonderful.  Bilbo  had  heard  tell  and  sing  of  dragon-hoards before, but "
the gate in the  trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined 
at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again. 
"Joceline Arnoud,4041597723873,04-06-1988
"
"red.  Softly they paced the  great  courtyard,  and  at a word from Denethor  "
Stoops in shadow grey and grim! 
a bear left the shadow of the trees and shambled off quickly after them. 
are unwary and do not  look about  them. They think  their friends watch all  
"     The watchers held their breath. 'Faramir must be there,' they said. 'He "
"commanded  to capture hobbits, alive, at all costs.  An attempt was made  to "
"the Valar when the world was young. His golden shield was uncovered, and lo!  "
"got  in  their coats  it stuck and burned  into  them, and unless  they  rolled over quick "
There was  a stream at the foot of the hill. They  filled their  bottles and 
     Merry alone  seemed fairly cheerful.  'You had  better lead  on and find 
"Leoine MacGown,4041592843387,05-12-1986
"
"question. ""What have I got in my pocket?"" he said louder.  "
"the day began to fail. Tea-time had long gone by, and it seemed supper-time would "
voices. 
"after, and  none of  my own folk were to spare;  and  then  one  thing after  "
"my  own?""  But  wonder  overcame  him  and  he  added:  ""But  how  came  you  by  the "
"walking-song, but the words were not quite the same. "
"Clarence Stebbings,4017954158425273,15-02-1989
"
to victory!' 
     'You should have. I am sure it is very important.' 
"she arrived later in the day, she took the point  at once, but she also took  "
of  the  Lake-men  and  the  Elves  were  hurrying  towards  the  Mountain.  But  now 
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge. 
"     Hope he rekindled, and in hope ended; "
spring when the wind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be  
into the ever -gathering darkness.  
out.  Ever  since  the  fall  of  the Great Goblin  of  the Misty Mountains  the hatred of 
"Mira Hearnaman,4632454447566529,08-05-1998
"
"     That day passed  much  as the  day  before had  gone,  except that  the "
"of him, cursing and whispering as he ran. "
the briar-thickets clouds of hungry midges danced and reeled. 
the City.' 
""
"at all, they have to live like  other living creatures. Foul waters and foul "
"     ' I wish - I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,' "
     Frodo   lay for  a while  fighting with  the sleep that was overpowering 
"go down proper. I've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last  camp, "
never was a meeting of friends more joyful.' And they  clasped hand in hand. 
"Otho Bowcock,4041595730454545,16-06-1978
"
the ringing of swords: such  sounds as had not been  heard in  the  hallowed 
"stars are  faint; and I am weary a s I have  seldom been before,  weary as no "
####-toiled back up  the  long  tunnel. His heart was beating and a more  fevered shaking 
arm into it. It  faced westward. The level shafts  of the setting sun behind 
"####-as  he liked; and  if anyone  got ""uppish"" as  they called it, they followed "
####-if he did not come. 
light was on their tired and anxious faces; behind them the night was like a  
"I myself  shall turn back at  once."" And with that he mounted and would have "
"places there were ruined works of stone beside the path, and mounds of green "
forgetting even  to draw his sword he struck his hands  into his pockets. And- there 
wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria.  He shivered. Frodo felt 
shaped like a rayed star. 
"They  were  a  gloomy  party  that  night,  and  the  gloom  gathered  still  deeper  on "
"     'O very well,' said Sam, `have it your own way! I don't suppose it's so "
"him  gently swayed wide  beechen boughs,  and  through  their  young  leaves "
"and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his "
     Pippin pressed  forward  as  they passed  under the  lamp  beneath  the 
"that he knows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into "
"blow. 'I am a herald and ambassador, a nd may not be assailed!' he cried. "
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out. 
"Dwalin's  green  hood  hanging  up.  He  hung  his  red  one  next  to  it,  and  ""Balin  at "
with him that are too good to lose. I knew you'd lead them into a mess. I've 
"fire drew near. And even as  he  espied them and came swooping down, he  "
"become a rout.  He may,  perhaps, hold  his men  together long enough, but I  "
"     ` ""Strider! "" I cried, shouting for joy. "
so far.' 
all the poor dwarves dance and dangle like ripe fruit) he reached the first bundle. 
next  to  nothing  to  old  songs  (as  is  not  unusual  at  auctions).  Bilbo's  cousins  the 
they are making songs about his deeds from  here to  the Sea and beyond  the 
stalked the dark forest of Fangorn; still ten leagues away stood its shadowy 
approaches.' 
"without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!' "
secret. For me  the time of stealth  has  passed.  I  will ride east by  the 
the hobbit had come to a sudden and a nasty end. 
"Ange Date,4017958340143,13-09-1984
"
"""Your servant, Mr. Baggins,"" said Bilbo. "
"     `It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,'  said  Faramir.  'But at the "
"Shannan Penton,4017954985169938,15-01-1987
"
"pantry. He had only  just had break  fast, but he  thought a cake or  two and a drink "
fitfully  through the breaking clouds.  Suddenly  Frodo started  from sleep. 
"     But long ago he rode away, "
"portion of  the wall  to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it "
"     They  came  now to  the foot of Orthanc.  It  was black, and  the  rock  "
"Presently  he remembered what he was looking  for. `My  pipe!'  he said, and "
####-hedgehog. Hold still!' 
To songs of yore re-sung. 
through which ran murmuring the silver stream that issued from the  fountain 
"trees below. Their course  had been chosen to  leave Woodhall to their left, "
"than your line, King Elessar.' "
and Anduin leads down to the Sea. To the Sea! 
"lightly, but quavering a little. 'If it was a bird, it was  one that I never  "
Each  company  was guided by  a wild woodman; but old Ghvn walked beside 
of uncounted years. But  the  thickets offered to the Riders their last hope 
eager  light was  in their eyes.  Nearly due  west the  broad  swath  of the 
""
"out of it comes the dragon too-far too often, unless he has changed."" "
"Suddenly  on  the  path  ahead  appeared  some  white  deer,  a  hind  and  fawns  as "
"us.  But their  power  is in  terror, and already some in Bree are in  their "
"willows, blocked  with fallen willows,  and flecked with thousands  of faded "
"Wormtongue,  or  doubtless  he  would be here  to  welcome  such  honourable "
did not  even dare  to  search on  the ground  for  scraps of  food  for  fear of becoming 
"Harbert Ianilli,4017953523859,18-07-1997
"
faces before him. The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and 
""
"Belita Rippon,4041592072072027,16-12-1996
"
answered Gandalf.  
"off."" "
"him.  Bombur  would  sleep  (he  could  sleep  at  any  time,  and  ever  since  the "
"     'That's when  I sat right up  and rubbed  my  eyes,  meaning  to give a  "
"     'Yes. Well no, I didn't get him. He  came to me, because  he trusted me "
sorcerous. Bilbo stood still and watched-he loved smoke-rings-and then be blushed 
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender. 
"They were filled with wounded men, all that could be sa ved from the wreck of "
the  brim of  his  hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through 
wind of his  speed. To  Frodo it  appeared  that a  white  light was shining 
"Mason Drysdale,4041595843897,23-03-1983
"
were  brought  before him many to  receive  his praise and reward  for their 
with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab in the dark.' 
"coming towards us.  Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he  vanished.  I "
between his knees. 
"     The  king rode in the  midst  of the leading company, his household-men "
"pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.' "
"bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round; and they  looked "
arm.  Howling with pain and fear but desperate the orc charged head-down  at 
certainly to each  of the companions the  boughs appeared to be bending this 
 
"keep up with  him; but he seemed  no longer to have any thought of escaping, "
"The River  had taken Boromir  son of Denethor,  and he was not seen again in "
####-of Erkenbrand!' 
A little earthenware lamp burned in a niche. 
"all his trouble, except the armour which Thorin had given him already. More than "
"     'Yet we cannot stay here beyond  the walls to defend them,' said Jomer. "
"Camellia Cudihy,4017959203508270,14-09-2000
"
"Rohirrim,' said Aragorn, 'for it is closed to  them.  But  in this dark hour "
"journey's end. As for a hat, I have got a spare hood and cloak in my luggage."" "
revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in Lurien: Frodo with a pale face 
wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a  rainy smell. 'Sun  won't show her face 
with his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and 
"this place,  as a town  or secret temple or a tomb of kings, none could say. "
"     'I'm sorry I  can't explain it all,' answered  Frodo.  'I  am tired and "
"Blinni Selbie,4017952802791,02-08-1994
"
had 
"nor of  us others that  I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to "
     `We may remain there for a while  and make  a brave stand; but the Lord 
disembarked.  Here  they  were  joined  by  the  horses  with  other  provisions  and 
each wall was a  gate. But the gates were not set in a line:  the Great Gate 
white gleam had shone before him and drawn his feet towards Slowly it grew to a 
"     'All together,  paddle!  '  shouted  Boromir. 'Paddle! Or  we  shall be "
"slopes lapping  the ever -mounting hills,  there  now a forest  loomed. Great "
"     'About the palantnri of the Kings of Old,' said Gandalf. "
"a hill of carrion before them. There  are still other fastnesses, and secret "
"     It  may  have  been  that the dancing  shadows tricked their eyes,  but "
"Teresita Deyenhardt,4017954733590245,29-03-2000
"
"Alysia Bremmer,4138193597378,24-10-1991
"
he waved  his arm west  towards the black beacon. 'But  none  to see between 
other  side. Though he could not catch or  understand any of the words  -- he 
"by road this time."" "
"of  summer  was  shining through a roof of young  leaves. Looking back,  the "
     `The third? ' 
"The  servant has a  claim on the master  for service, even  service in fear. "
 
climb the pass.  
"Precious, not to let Him have it -- never. But it's going to Him yes, nearer  "
"Farlay McAllan,4305701998926866,28-07-1996
"
"Gondor.  Wherever he came  men's  hearts would  lift  again,  and the winged "
it was  his  turn  to  attack.  The  spider  evidently was  not  used  to  things  that carried 
"glimmered far away, as if floating  on a  grey cloud, the white head of tall "
"""They have gone to tell him of the arrival of strangers,"" said Gandalf. "
on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful 
the words had set the venom to its work again. it seemed to him that the hue 
"     So sleek, so fair! "
"up,  in time to see a tall dark  figure like a shadow against the stars.  It "
"     At the time  when this story begins the Bounders, as they were  called, "
"Hadria Shotboult,4041377045782401,30-10-1982
"
"Willie Jentin,4771513794412412,10-08-1983
"
"     'Old  knives are long  enough  as  swords for  hobbit-people,' he said. "
"to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! ' "
"his ears, the crash of the feet  a nd the  rending clamour of the Orcs before "
     For  the  other  Companions steeds  were furnished  according to  their 
Roused  by  these  words  they  were  just  about  to  creep  inside  the  tunnel  when 
"It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees,  and it fell "
mountainsides. 
"these  parts? An Elf, a Man, and  a Dwarf. all  clad  in  elvish fashion. No "
"long  tradition,  and  there  are  moreover in  our  treasuries many  things "
"""O  Thorin  son  of  Thrain,  and  Balin  son  of  Fundin,""  he  croaked  (and  Bilbo "
"right direction. If they went on, down the  further side of the ridge,  they "
"they came to the  borders of the Entwash, and there they met the other trail "
"think the best thing is to  go as straight eastward from  here as we can, to "
(neatly brushed)  - Gandalf  came  by. Gandalf!  If  you  had  heard  only  a  quarter  of 
"rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The  captains of the  two parties "
"with the stones,  and withered mosses crawled on them; and  everywhere great "
"puffs of Gandalf's pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the window.  "
"Syd Towle,4041592844153,05-04-1998
"
"that  is Quickbeam in your language. But it is on ly  a  nickname, of course. "
"are guests, we bow to  our host, and  after we have eaten we rise  and thank "
"stone had fallen in  the passage. 'This can't be the way,'  Frodo whispered. "
that he was no goblin at all. 
"Citadel, save  that it was loftier, and it was all  white, and the  wings at "
the bushes people were talking. 
"     'Oh yes,  I forgot about him,'  said Pippin. 'He did not get here  till "
"City, and with him came an  jored of the fairest knights  of the Mark. He was "
"been  obliged  to  do  it  for  so  long,  and  he  knew  only  too  well  what  it  was  to  be "
It was  also  the  dungeon  of  his  prisoners.  So  to  the  cave  they  dragged Thorin-
"neck  now, and a terrible  burden it is, too.'  Sam fumbled for the Ring and "
"Frazer McCourt,4041594213696,06-09-1986
"
     an errand that should never rest 
"sore trial  for such a man: a warrior, and a  lord of men. Galadriel told me "
####-Sam was  pained to notice how little  honour he  had in his own country. Few 
""
"swords and helmets and  shields  and all. Make them think twice, that would. "
"Carlo Thowless,4041596453753,25-04-1975
"
friendship in those parts between elves and dwarves and men. 
"away on either side. They camped under the stars, and their horses had more to eat "
"or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.' "
"don't want to see them  again, the sooner we   get going  the better. Can you  "
"Brucie Trew,4041370304058373,09-02-1998
"
"Cherie Valder,4197050214100943,28-05-1993
"
"####-lads! Lockholes for him, and give him something to keep him quiet!' "
"what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of "
"only  to children, as  a careless custom. And now  the  songs have come down "
"High-elves, and the  orcs,  as  well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden of "
how bringing us up here will help him in that is more than I can guess.' 
others but more evil. 'I may have to report that. The prisoners  are  NOT to 
"head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his eyes. `We hate it,' he "
"Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was "
most part  managed their  own affairs. Growing  food and eating  it occupied  
     'Then you  must go. I must stay here anyway. But  I'm  hurt.  The Black  
     Night was cold up on the  high ridge. They lit a small fire  down under 
"     'I believe it no more than did Boromir,' answered Aragorn. "
"someone  that he had known, who had  walked proudly once in arms,  or tilled "
"shrill wailing, passing with  the wind, a voice bodiless and thin that died,  "
"Citadel,  and  entered  in;  and the banner  of  the Tree and the Stars  was "
to go. Yet it was not really the thought of the weather that stirred him. He 
many 
"flutes,  and  other musical instruments.  There were, as has been said, many "
solitude. They had then  walked almost eight leagues; and the hobbits  could 
"come on earth again; and she was called  Undumiel, for she was  the Evenstar "
"Orion Crock,4041592733475692,03-05-1990
"
cloud  hurried  over  the  sky. Winter  thunder  on  a wild wind  rolled  roaring  up  and 
"####-     `No indeed!'  said Elrond, turning towards  him with a smile.  `You  at "
"he said, ""and they may find their dwelling in the Waste grievous to bear. With my "
"     `Then I  will declare my doom,' said Faramir. `As for you, Frodo, in so "
"are,  things  that yet may be. But which it is that he sees, even the wisest  "
since I slept in a bed?' 
not help feeling just a trifle disappointed. The feeling surprised him. 
"Dorrie Alesbrook,4017955251517,21-11-1990
"
""
     A mist was in Merry's eyes of tears  and weariness when they  drew near  
not  forget what my  father  told me. Now  I  am  the  chief  of  the  great  ravens  of  the 
"that was melting. Then he fell flat on  the floor, and kept on calling out  ""struck by "
"was over, and Gandalf had not come. "
they leaned on their swords and looked on one another and were glad. 
middle way; and  I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul 
"to grow lighter  about him, as if  a cloud  had been  withdrawn.  He saw his  "
listen to at first;  but gradually his attention wavered.  After a long time 
"was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf  from the Grey Havens who had "
"Wolfy Lacroix,4041375308269,10-04-1992
"
"interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for  "
felling trees  and digging and building themselves sheds and houses just  as 
or luxury  that  could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the 
"     Herefara and Herubrand, Horn and Fastred, "
"strength. Sam's  plain  hobbit-face  grew stern,  almost  grim, as  the will "
him warning that his designs held any flaw. 
     They had rested rather less than five hours when they  took to the Road 
"few  now can read,  even of  the lore-masters, for their scripts and tongues "
"and L®thien and the winning of the  Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry "
southwards  along  the shore  they  came upon holly trees.  Stumps  and dead 
worrying  too much  about  himself  to remember  the dwarves. He managed  to keep 
"down! ' His voice came up clearly from below,  but Frodo could not see  him; "
"spiders caught them and bound them, and all the sounds of the battle next day, had "
"archway  all the time!  The translation  should have been:  Say ""Friend"" and "
could still see pale lights like eyes; but soon they flickered and vanished. 
"Saloma Ralfe,4041374405025,22-02-2000
"
"glorious. It seems very uncomfortable, not to say distressing. I wish I was well out "
"to  the  field of  Cormallen.  And Faramir  wondered at this, but he saw her  "
"Sutton Balsillie,4041370930166,02-06-1997
"
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has  destroyed: has he devoured 
"pressed to the walls. There came great beasts, like moving houses in the red  "
to shut out the immensity in a quiet room by a fire. 
agreement. 
scabbards  and  jewelled  hilts.  Gandalf  and  Thorin  each  took  one  of  these;  and 
"     So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there "
all the scars of war and the memory of the darkness.  
"up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn't. "
"keep a traveller on his feet for a day of  long labour, even if he be one of "
"     'You have drunk of  the waters of the  Ents, have  you?'  said Legolas.  "
"nassty noser has found it, we says."" "
"Janeen McLanaghan,4041371161174501,19-03-1990
"
"Pippin  cowered back, afraid for  a  moment,  wondering  into what  dreadful "
Suddenly  he  heard  a  screech.  It  sent  a  shiver  down  his  back.  Gollum  was 
darkness could not contain her. 
"one, but to ourselfs. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no, no.' "
     The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun among 
"     never mare to wake on stony bed, "
""
"their names? You shouldn't go scaring  me like that, with times as they are. "
"complex,  and  attempts  to  define  the  process  are at  best guesses from "
"can't  use  this  road. Oh  no!  Cruel peoples come this way, down  from the "
"     'Indeed yes,' said Gimli. 'The score is much reduced.' "
"red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn "
my  hands.  Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are fell -handed when they 
It  was  reached  by a round hole in  the  centre  through  which the ladder  
"     But  the orc  was  in its own haunts,  nimble  and  well -fed. Sam was a  "
Then  Smaug  really  did  laugh-a  devastating  sound  which  shook  Bilbo  to  the 
guess  that the burned bones of  the hobbits are now mingled with the Orcs'.  
"hand inside Frodo's tunic;  then with his other  hand raising the  head,  he "
let  him turn  me  into anything unnatural!  My old  dad would take on so. I 
"hobbit, wailing for some final  and desperate danger to  make it grow. Frodo "
"descent  from  father  to son, by some chance the blood  of Westernesse runs "
"of the range of the answering  bows  of their  enemies, who shot wildly, not "
"only legend that we knew, and Mithrandir had never told me more. "
 
forget about the night before. In fact he was just sitting down to a nice little second 
face  grew grey  with weariness; and ever and anon  he  called the  name  of 
"Ysabel Spinella,4041371291675,05-03-1982
"
     Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold; 
for a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still. 
"     `I was wrong after all,' said  Gandalf, 'and Gimli  too. Merry, of  all "
"     'That hour is now come, I think,' said Aragorn. "
name of that Lady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth. 
he'll  not leave  you again. Rest  you quiet  till  I  come; and may no foul 
"we kept  guard here,  and we  have watched you from afar. Never have we seen "
of  his  unfortunate  friends.  It  was  not  very  long  before  he  discovered;  but  that 
"this  food would do you good, if  you would try. But perhaps  you can't even  "
"burbrum,   those  evileyed  -  blackhanded  -  bowlegged  -  flinthearted  - "
"leaning on  the sta ff  in his left hand,  but  in his other  hand  Glamdring "
"all such courtesy, Gollum was scrabbling in the mould at the foot of a tree. "
"you. I  am giving you  a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free --  if you  "
"through him,  wondering if anywhere in  the vastness  of the night -lands his "
"     'Praised be  the bow  of Galadriel, and the  hand and eye of Legolas! ' "
yet seven years old.' 
"####-     `Smjagol'll get  into real true hot water , when this water boils, if he "
"     Hand  in hand they went  back into the City, the last to  pass the Gate "
"yet so  courteous. And  how shall I  refuse, since I commanded him to speak? "
celebrating   his   eleventy-first  birthday   with  a   party  of   special 
"three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but  there was as yet "
perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.' 
time to  puzzle  out the last few pages. Here  is the last page of  all.' He 
became  more frequent  as they  got nearer the  top; very old and  tall they 
"strangely fortunate. Maybe, I  have been  saved by this  hobbit from a grave "
     'Thank goodness  I  did  not  realize the horrible danger!' said  Frodo 
"The board is set, and the pieces are moving. One piece that I greatly desire "
"of them, three in  each  Farthing,  for  Inside Work. A  rather larger body, "
"     and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children, "
"     Time went on, and 1421 came  in. Frodo was ill again in March, but with "
"Gearard Keywood,4017956480222,07-03-1976
"
you see any markings  on it?' he asked. 
"Now  these were  fair words and  true,  if proudly and grimly  spoken; and Bilbo "
narrower and the River swifter. Now  they were speeding  along  with  little  
"Eugen Delagua,4041376416228,15-10-1987
"
"words  was  that  for  the  moment  the  people  quite  forgot  their  idea  of  a  new  king, "
"Hasufel and Arod, that Jomer,  the  Third Marsha l  of the Mark,  lent to us,  "
"he. 'Did I  hear you calling?  Nay, I did not hear: I was busy singing. Just  "
"that  he  will be  overtaken  ere he can  reach Helm's Gate, if  he  has not "
"in the garden, but she did not come. "
"naked, and neither quill nor  feather did it bear, and its vast pinions were "
"     'We  mean,'  said Pippin, choosing his  wor ds carefully,  'that it's no "
none could say. Jomer spoke. 
"this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path. "
same. This time he threw it with greater strength. 
"     of silver were her lanterns made, "
"Kylynn Le Gall,4041597618727,20-12-1977
"
"     'I  doubt  it,'  said   the  landlord  unhappily.  'The  two  or  three "
"     'Up away by Deadmen's Dike?' said Butterbur, looking even more dubious.  "
It was some time before Thorin could bring the dwarves to be silent and listen 
"Giffard Keen,4054393440873,11-01-1979
"
     They  came  to the pillar  of  the  White  Hand.  The  pillar was still 
"they did not quite  lose  their wits. ""Save us, Galion!"" cried some, ""you began your "
""
"Siffre Oade,4017953794528300,26-10-1979
"
"Lawry Donaghie,4017952257699,08-01-1995
"
country. To their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit-holes of 
"step, as he ran. In the lane the noise  of hoofs broke out, and gathering to "
"Teddie Kroon,4041374987568,23-03-1995
"
Frodo  now  feeling eased  and greatly refreshed were  able  to go at a fair 
"their peculiar words  and customs, that like many other  folk Hobbits had in "
"""What have I got in my pocket?"" he said aloud. He was talking to himself, but "
"they did  not move or speak with mouth, looking from mind  to mind; and only "
"seemed to him in that  dark hour of weariness, still  labouring in the stony "
"little; but before long the  drifting snow was above his  hocks, and it went "
"     'It is the will of Thjoden,' said Hbma. "
"once  there  came  a  bloodcurdling  shriek,  filled  with  hatred  and  despair.  Gollum "
in the  lowlands  and  flowed   away  out of  the  knowledge of the  hobbits.  
"so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and "
"Baxy Jako,4017958603677362,18-07-1996
"
""
"Wood at your  own door next:  it is wayward, and senseless, and  has no love "
"Parnell Sweetenham,4017952832186,17-10-1988
"
"Cristen Laugier,4041376691077,05-10-1983
"
 
"     'What is it? ' he whispered, springing  up and coming to Frodo. `I felt "
"through  the  widening  gap.  Then a  great,  flat,  toeless foot was for ced "
     Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark gateway  into 
"Elves and Men, bearing the sceptre of Ann®minas,  and beside him upon a "
"     But just as he thought his dinner was caught, "
"house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad moving  hill.  "
"Shire-buildings without Leave, and Bribing Guards with Food.' "
used it in  their own fashion. They did not go in  for  towers. Their houses 
""
many falls.  
"gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor,  and Grishnbkh's folk closed in "
"left. Mine is gone. But I can't dash, Sam. I'll just plod along after you.' "
"Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!' As he  spoke  he  struck a small silver  "
"Toni Brandli,4041375717029408,02-04-1987
"
save where our realm is maintained. 
gasping 
"out  for  a  while above the roof  of the Forest. The path dipped, and  then "
"itself, I suppose; and the crowns of  seven kings. and the rods of  the Five "
"the road."" I didn't like the looks of  him; and when  Grip came out, he took  "
"encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none escaped your net in such "
"####-trodden  with  this Company, I  do  not much doubt  that I shall find a  way "
"went  out  again  and  soon  came  back  carrying  torches  in  their mouths, which  they "
"going  to gel his own back. People would see if he would stand being kicked, "
can trust us to keep any secret of yours  - closer than you keep it yourself.  
"in the walls, a great voice calling. "
"guard, headfirst into the mist; he landed sprawling on the grass.  "
long ago. 
them. Pippin shuddered as hard cold fingers groped down his back. 
""
and masters of lore will blanch and fall silent. 
"queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's  not in this business. He's off to "
and  who  looked each  morning  for  news  of doom. Their lord was  dead and 
furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give ba ttle.' 
"gone cold, or else I've caught a chill.' "
"     'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling.  'Dwarves  are  said  to be "
"of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if "
was  responsible  for so many quiet  lads and  lasses going off  into  the Blue  for mad 
"Lela Pett,4041379673748100,04-10-1977
"
"     'No, lord. But many  of your men  retreated into the Deep; and some say "
"Hillary Kobu,4017951996107113,05-05-1985
"
agree  on  who  was  to  be  sent:  no  one  seemed  anxious  to  run  the  chance  of  being 
"Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom it "
went down  by  a long stair cut in the rock to the valley's  bottom.  It was 
"     Gandalf  looked quickly at Frodo,  but he had shut his  eyes. 'Yes, you  "
not. The only  plan that  is proposed  to us  is that a halfling should walk  
"orc-host coming down out of the East  Wall  three nights ago, and among them "
by other  paths. Orcs travel  fast.  But  Saruman has many  ways of learning 
     'I  do  not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the  River  any 
     `Do you think he can see us? ' said Sam. 
"     `Some,  Galdor,'   said Gandalf, `would think the tidings of Gluin,  and "
""
Ya hey! 
####-The dragon's ire more fierce than fire  
"     'His arm  has grown long indeed,' said Gimli, `if he can draw snow down "
"swords. Glamdring shone  with a  pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges.  "
"####-mountain of darkness  rose, towering up like a wave  that  should engulf the "
     'It  was only a  feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would 
plea sant to think of that and set it against my injuries.' 
"way,  I  don't  know. And  I  don't  know what  I  should  have done with  it when  I got "
"as  some  compensation  for  the  lost animals. He was an  honest  man,   and "
"through  the Gate, men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor  "
to  go  nearer  and  try  once  more  to  get  help.  Up  they  got  again;  and  this  time  the 
result  was  disastrous.  The  feast  that  they  now  saw  was  greater  and  more 
"     ' ""Until what end? "" "
"confer, and that  was courage. At present Sam  still thought only of hiding, "
cliffs.  'Khazvd! Khazvd!' He soon had work enough. 
"the tongue  of  the  Riddermark,  demanding  the  names and  errand  of  the  "
companions.  
"between them, and the River swept the boats towards it. "
"Town McGuire,4041591717384,26-10-1994
"
"enchantment  became more and more dreamlike, until  he  felt  that an endless "
"and steadily, and  it was over at  last. His  chief  fear had been  that the "
many long years.' 
"White Mountains of the Realm of Gondor, tipped with everlasting snow. "
and  ever-even  supposing  a  wish  would  have  taken  him  right  back  to  his  hobbit-
before  the deadly pursuit  began. And  both  my  fear and  my  hope  proved  
"know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North Stair, and the high seat "
"     A dish and a  spoon on the table danced, "
down from  the skirts of the snow; and as he looked he  was aware that alone 
"them, blue and clear to  their surprise, for down under the Forest -roof they "
"to  deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even "
"courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands "
"Lavinia Shipman,4646136200346918,25-08-1993
"
"Janot Kermon,4017958647265,05-02-1981
"
"was  wearing  off,  and  he  was  not  now  quite  so  sure  that  he  was  going  on  any "
""
"Hollin ended. Holly  was  the  token  of the  people of that land, and  they "
"weapons  they had, would have been of no use against  the arrows of  the elves  that "
"""It  is  true  that we were wrongfully waylaid by the Elven-king and imprisoned "
"Nowell Dy,4041596672854536,31-10-1984
"
City.' 
the  battlement and fell thudding  within the first circle of  the City; and 
     `Hear all ye Elves! ' she cried to those about her. `Let none say again 
washing. There were three high narrow windows that looked northward over 
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket. 
and the branches swayed and groped without any wind. They  do  say the trees 
"what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!' "
####- 
"high in the south the moon glimmered out, riding in the flying wrack. "
safety;  all  the  treasure  is  yours-for  the  moment.  But  many  are  gathering  hither 
mattresses along the  wall. As he went by  the  cave-mouth  he saw  that the 
"sort  of  eyes.  ""Insect  eyes""  he  thought,  ""not  animal  eyes,  only  they  are  much  too "
"     'I do not know,' answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by one "
"     Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward  into the field of Gondor,  "
 
towards the Lonely Mountain. 
one last pull to the rope as if in farewell. 
flickering and glowing  on the walls away down the passage before them. They 
"     The outer fall  was  indeed no  longer  sheer,  but  sloped outwards  a  "
"him  where  the  walls  were  nearest  could  dimly  be  seen  coats  of  mail,  helms  and "
"Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing  happened. The old man did "
Chapter 8. The Scouring of the Shire 
wise. It was inevitable that they should make alliance. Gandalf would ascend 
Menelvagor with  his shining  belt. The  Elves all burst into song. Suddenly 
"easy enough to find him without that, if ever we arrive there."" "
"They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist, a yard "
water -channel: this is the way that the Orcs went after their debate.' 
"climb the barrier and the banks, and the hobbits were obliged  to shoot many  "
"or Man came near, only the unhappy Orcs. Poor  food  and  wary. But she must  "
"bones  and skin like ivory, and the long  curved nose between  the dark deep "
he came  to his senses; and also he was determined  that no word of gold or  jewels 
"wall of their shields  was broken as by  a  lightning-stroke, and  they were "
"at bay,  and  at  need could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow,  "
now  and  then  they  had  to  turn  and  fight  the  creatures  that were  overtaking  them 
but  hardly without  being seen;  and he could not have played hide-and-seek 
"hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be "
""
"Three  times Aragorn and Jomer  rallied them, and three times And®ril flamed "
"swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky. "
broken  bones  and skulls.  The  swift growth  of the wild  with  briar  and 
"Christabella Daveley,4041374447121528,09-07-1994
"
"Lothaire Andreasson,4017957112865,14-04-1977
"
"own. The dragon rolled over. ""Look!"" he said. ""What do you say to that?"" "
"Lucie Tarbett,4041594329138,14-11-2000
"
dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them. 
"####-     'This is good tidings,' said Aragorn. 'Yet  the marks are  two days old "
met Glorfindel.' 
     'Now  do I most  grudge  a time of rest or any halt in our chase ' said 
"Ursola Abbati,4041370388486920,04-12-1991
"
"""I am so sorry  to keep you waiting!"" he was going  to say, when he saw  that  it "
"where  he  was  sitting-and  ""Good Gracious!""  he  thought,  ""so  that  is what  they  are "
"mists shimmered in  the watervales;  and far off to the left, thirty leagues "
"     'But  after that  we  must guess  the riddles, if we  are to choose our "
"Pearla Mackneis,4374660584795323,03-09-1977
"
back. foiled by his hidden  coat of mail. Another passed  through  Aragorn's 
"complete  protection  in  a  goblin  charge,  nor  does  it  stop  flying  arrows  and  wild "
"Anissa Hynam,4002429854138,25-12-1975
"
"     The day's march promised to be warm and tiring  work. After some miles, "
"on him  and took and locked him up in a hole in Michel Delving, and there he "
"I'll never forgive myself. Nor won't have a chance, maybe! ' "
"     'Welcome  and well met!'  said the dwarf, turning towards  him. Then he "
"     Frodo's head  was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands "
"     When Sam awoke, he found that he  was lying on some soft bed, but  over "
"their way, bending low with his head beside the neck of Hasufel. Before long "
in  the  most  delightful  and  satisfactory  fashion.  A  large  house  was  given  up  to 
"But sad or merry, I must leave it now. Farewell!"" "
"his veins. 'Hail, lord!' he said.  'It is long since the people  of Nimrodel "
"Debor Mullins,4041596515093755,21-07-2001
"
"top of the old mound on the hill, and  from it the sunlight on the gold went "
help  and  shared  the  plunder with  them. Sometimes  they  rode  on wolves  like men 
Some say they were planted in the old days.' 
"mist gathered, and  rising slowly to a great height like smoke  from a fire, "
     Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo   like the 
"journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof,  and "
####-the blood run cold. It could not be borne. He  sprang up. He flung the Quest  
"have in the camp!"" "
things.  How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how  soon could 
and out  without being noticed. It had been built a long while before by the 
not again.' 
"Sam struck with all  his  force, and  at last  one single cord  of  all  the "
about 
ancient art his ears might hear the thunder of hoofs on the plains far away. 
"twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and  not likely "
"Angelita Jurs,4017954001483,13-06-1981
"
"of the dale Merry saw a frowning wall, a last outlier of the great  roots of "
"large  flat feet,  peering with pale luminous eyes  and  catching blind fish "
orc-figures  began  to move. Four in the middle were carrying a body high on 
""
"     Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained  graven in his memory,  "
"""A share in the profits, mind you,"" he went on. ""I am aware of that. Personally "
"befall her. And yet, Jomer, I  say to you that she loves you more truly than "
door and thrust forward his staff:  There was a dazzling flash that  lit the 
"Merrill Markovich,4041596902593,26-11-1988
"
"'Hoy!  Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood  under the "
"     and laid on him undying doom, "
####-     Presently Ghvn turned to the king. 'Wild Men say many things ' he said. 
"Fair Folk and get news  of them,'  he said. 'There's Mr. Baggins now, that I "
     `Welcome to  Caras  Galadhon!  ' he  said. 'Here  is the  city  of  the 
"""Go on, call away!"" "
days 
"was silent, and  would  say only that Gimli  alone could find fit  words  to "
all about them people were shouting. 
"Dain  could  reach  the  Lonely Mountain,  if  he  had  set  out  as  soon  as  the message "
"upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many steps. "
"     Sing now, ye people of the Tower of Anor, "
"clothed in everlasting snow, gleamed far above the world, blue-shadowed upon "
"Of course ""somebody"" meant Bilbo. They chose him because  to be of any use "
"don't want to read any more."" ' "
"Rachelle Bottjer,4041372356154,11-03-1991
"
"Bert.  ""Here  you,  are  there  any  more  of  your  sort  a-sneakin'  in  these  here woods, "
"tired limbs, and they felt glad and easy of heart as they had not done since "
""
left in his heart that he wou ld ever see any of them again. 
Chapter 3. The Muster of Rohan 
a strange device: a small white hand in the centre of a black field; on  the 
"bright helms with their tattered hoods, and one by one they walked behind Thorin, "
"Mark was overrun; and so ended the nine mounds of the west-side, for in that "
returning.' 
"were, however, now in a tolerant  mood, at that  delightful stage which they "
usual  allowance-now  is  the  time  for  him  to  perform  the  service  for which  he was 
"came here, I can't imagine. For Saruman's private use. I fancy. I never knew "
the 
"     At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. `So that is what became of the "
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words. 
"     'You will have no claim,' said  Haldir. `I shall lead you well, and the "
East -borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl  than 
"####-explain, and I shall never have  the heart  or  the chance to get off. But I "
all was still dark as night. The Mountain smoulder ed and its fires went out. 
"Silvana Wolfindale,4051408301900,08-01-1994
"
"Austine Redmile,4017955286751142,06-03-1980
"
steep bank  that was crowned with old cedars. Here they  decided to rest and 
"Laurella Pratte,4683883443319376,04-04-1979
"
"'A poor old half-starved creature it is,'  said Bob; 'but he won't part with "
should  have  gone  back  quietly  and  warned  his  friends  that  there  were  three  fair-
"Stormy Gianetti,4041599489366,18-02-1979
"
"hastily.  Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking  his "
it stooped a black figure. 
"from it until it seemed to shine in the  centre of a globe of  airy crystal, "
"on the slopes above the Gate, and others were streaming down recklessly, heedless "
under his deep brows as he bent his gaze upon the man. 
"said, 'about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.' "
"No  sooner  had  he  finished  speaking  than  the  old  thrush  gave  a  loud  call,  and "
"Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is "
"stuff  up ""for fair  distribution"": which meant  they got it  and we didn't, "
"Berkeley Wisniewski,4615379642698,12-09-1992
"
locked up under guard. The dead leader was dragged off and buried. 
"me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.' "
"is  now.  And after that, it  would bc soon after New Year,  there wasn't no "
""
"     'Alas!  then I  have guessed rightly,' said Gandalf. 'Thus  the will of "
of Elrond's house!' 
"     `Daro!'  it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to  earth "
"and weather -worn, and the faint runes upon its side could not be read. `This "
"enjoying  the attention he was getting,  and had  become  quite forgetful of "
"we've done better than you hoped,' he said sturdily.  'Began  well anyway. I "
"your  head  be  it,  if  the  king's  full  buttertubs  and  his  best  wine  is  pushed  into  the "
     as proud as any queen; 
"The Pelennor lay dim  beneath him, fading away to the scarce guessed line of "
"""Gandalf,  Gandalf!  Good  gracious  me!  Not  the  wandering  wizard  that  gave "
to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.' 
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his 
"A sharp hiss came out  of him, and  for a second his hand upon  Sam's throat "
"     But the ring was  not on the island; he had  lost it, it was  gone. His "
bind them and take them to the king.' 
"called  him,  oldest and  fatherless. But many another name he has since been  "
Following  him  they  found  themselves  in  a  wide  hall  with  a  fire-place  in  the 
"out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that  he may  even think  that  the "
their  link land  was not  much  further  than a  day's  riding  east of the 
known more about it before we started. But I  suppose  it's often  that way. 
     'Do  you  think  the Black Riders  have  anything to do  with it  - with 
towed  away  round  the  high  shoulder  of  rock  into  the  little  bay  of  Lake-town. 
that they wear to give shape  to their  nothingness when  they have dealings 
may you be doing?' 
up quivering. 
"     The company halted, and there was  not a  heart among them that did not  "
Smjagol 
     'Well?' said Jomer. 'What of it?' 
"Otis Shoobridge,4041371520008,10-07-1993
"
"been closed with a web-but luckily not a proper web, only great strands of double-"
been so busy before. 
"part had  been to prevent the hobbits  in their wrath at  their losses, from "
devoured 
telling the king all about his treasure and his quest (which shows how low-spirited 
"Catarina Goulthorp,4041595144445,06-06-1975
"
     `Fling  fuel on the  fire!' cried  Gandalf to  the  hobbits. `Draw your 
"caused  by  the  dwarves  and  Bilbo  and  the  wizard,  for  whom  they  were  probably "
"built by the Men of Gondor in their pride and power,  after the overthrow of "
     'Whither did he go?' asked Jomer. 
"The  night  became  fine  under  star and round moon, and  it seemed  to the "
"'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as "
smooth. And how light his footfalls are!' 
came  a sound  like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in  
"the Elven-tongue that they spoke, or one but little different; and he looked "
"sounded much too adventurous-when, ding-dong-a-ling-' dang, his bell rang again, "
"""Nonsense!  We  are  going  to  turn  aside  here  out  of  the  path  of  the  slide.  We "
back  and its  sword flew  up in molten  fragments. The wizard swayed on the 
the iron jaws of Carach Angren. 
"     'If I am  it  is your  fault,' said Bilbo. 'It is mine, I  tell you. My "
"     `I will take the Ring,' he said, `though I do not know the way.' "
through the  thickets on the right; and this they  followed as it wound away 
'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.' 
"Ronnie St. Paul,4041374008423,31-12-1980
"
     He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have 
casting it away. 
the mountains had vomited the filth of  their entrails upon the lands about. 
"like an old patient spider, Pippin  thought: he  did not seem  to have moved "
"     Pippin and Bergil  edged their way  forward to the front of the  crowd, "
Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat. 
"Felisha Alliberton,4041598737415980,08-09-1979
"
"Margeaux Bengtsen,4659717738327563,10-10-1975
"
"even for much longer. He's a  prisoner in Bag  End  now,  I expect, and very "
"secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning."" "
the days to come. Swear to me now!' 
"     The fires went  out, and blank darkness  fell. The Company stood rooted "
####-the shards of the horn aside. 'Give me the weapon!' he said. 
had ever done. 
"     'At  the breach our  rearguard  must  stand,  if we  are pressed,' said "
the cover from  Gollum's head and set him on his feet standing behind him to 
"open, and they went across a  wide passage and through other doors, and came "
"and the older villages, such  as  Hobbiton or Tuckborough,  or in the  chief "
"Ambrose Ledley,4041375851550540,25-08-1994
"
"kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood. "
"more  difficult, but Gollum seemed in no  way troubled. He  led them through "
saw 
piled in years of labour. Before them towards Mordor lay like a moat a great 
make little of  them in  this light.  Now  there must  be a number of leaves 
"whisper of voices all about him, a murmur of words in no tongue  that he had "
 
"his  master's  aid if needed. He  could see  Faramir's face,  which  was now "
"Killy Latty,4017955616792,09-03-1984
"
"Antonin Geeves,4041599003837,25-09-1993
"
"the City to bring aid. But he bowing low to the fallen, bade  them farewell, "
darkness  in  which  nothing  could  be  seen  lay  before  their  eyes  mouth  leading  in 
"     `What  did you  blush for, Sam?  ' said  Pippin. `You soon  broke down. "
"food and drink to give you that will drive away the night -chill, and we have "
""
"Homerus Boolsen,4622077186838,16-11-1998
"
he could see dimly  in its light. To his surprise he noticed  that the great 
growing thinner and more  transparent. Far above  the rot and vapours of the 
his  coming.  I  thought  that would  alter  their mood! Bid them come few in number 
a shimmer as the travellers came towards them. 
'So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?' 
and the hobbits turned their minds  to food. Their last meal  had been lunch 
"####-But do not command many  men to go with you, Thjoden. We go to  a parley "
"     'No,'  said  Frodo. 'There  are none. It is quite  plain,  and it never  "
"     It drew now to evening by the hour, and  the light was so dim that even "
stamping far away. What became of him Sam never heard: whether  he escaped 
not?' he asked. 
"     'What's the danger?' asked Pippin. 'Will he shoot at  us, and pour fire "
two 
"to know  them before  they arrived, and he preferred  to ask  them himself. He had a "
     `Gollum!' he called. `Would  you like to be the hero  -- now where's  he 
"were only waiting now for  Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A "
that grew from the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for 
"     'Few now remember them,' Tom murmured,  'yet  still some  go wandering, "
"used to say;  and need of vittles, as he  mostways used to  add. You  have a  "
"     'But  now, lord, what would you  have me do! I must return in  haste to "
"dark pit, sometimes down into black bush-shrouded hollows and out again; but "
the line of hills that from Nardol to Don ran east and west. Through the gap 
their plight  and  the  still unconquered dragon) would  suffer  seriously if the Wood-
an exclamation.  Frodo was delighted (in a  way):  it was  his own ring  all 
began  to blow steadily  out  of  the West and pour the water of the distant 
"     'We are  no phantoms,' said Aragorn,  'nor do your  eyes  cheat you. For  "
"sons of forgotten  kings walking in loneliness,  guarding  from  evil things "
####-<h4>Chapter 10</h4> <br> 
"to  get the journey over as quickly  as possible, and were willing, tired as "
"now. Gorbag  was right, I tell you. There's  a great fighter  about,  one of "
"     'Well, we'd  better decide on  the way now,' said  Pippin. 'The morning "
lived were doubtless  the  same  as  those  in which  they still linger: the 
"     'Do I  want it? Do I want it?' said Grishnbkh, as if  puzzled;  but his "
on the other side. 
with a cry of pain Sam released the sword and it fell to the ground; and all 
     At first  their  choice  seemed  to  be good: they got along  at a fair 
"Nat Pursey,4077976354567,26-07-1999
"
"Gollum was gorging and off his guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be "
Frodo.  Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully 
"draughts from the mountain-springs, and we shall see Gandalf's beard curling "
"####-     The Orcs  were piled in great heaps, away  from the mounds  of Men, not "
"have warned him of the  peril  that crept, small  but  indomitable, into the "
"used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of affection, possibly.( "
"     The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told  them that the men "
"road;  they  had  frightened  everyone  away  from  the  district,  and  they  waylaid "
"wore it now in all Gondor,  save the Guards of the Citadel  before the Court "
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase  with every league that 
waterfalls in them. There were dark ravines that one could neither jump nor climb 
####-songs  of mirth  to  come  had  been  sung  about  the  dwarves. Now men cursed  their 
"But we  cannot enter here,  for  the gates do not look northward. We must go  "
"     'And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,' laughed "
"straddling  the  stream, which  it  fouled  with  a  steaming  and  stinking "
""
The chamber was lit  by a  wi de shaft high in the  further  eastern wall; it 
"they had imagined.  'There's earth under  his  old  feet, and  clay  on  his "
"####-strength,' said Jomer,  'I  counsel that we  rest now, and set out hence  by "
"is already master of your outer  walls,'  said Gandalf. 'King of Angmar long "
Elbereth.' 
"would wish. There is something very  big going on, that I can see, and  what "
"Nickola Purvess,4041596670505,31-01-1979
"
"for  a  chance  drip  to  fall  on  your  tongue.  The  only  scrap  of  comfort  there  was, "
"Danella Titmarsh,4017955858063,28-08-1983
"
the flash which killed the goblins that were grabbing him he had nipped inside the 
calling out: Ai na vedui D®nadan! Mae govannen! His speech and clear 
"their crawling hill and holds them all in sway, ants will wander witless and "
"what direction the path lay,  and in what direction he should go first to look for the "
stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky  sky the bleak and treeless 
should be dragged out of him. 
the roaring of the falls. 
"Here the air was still, stagnant, heavy, and sound fell dead. They walked as "
"the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.' "
"Vivian Mayte,4898464167773576,22-05-1993
"
"     'Good, good!' said Gimli. 'I am glad that it was not you.' "
with  their  fore-feet.  Quickly  they  got  out  boards  and  trestles  from  the  side  walls 
"purpose in the Shire, and it is not to begin now. And nobody is to be killed "
""
"sleep,' said Aragorn. "
""
but  more came later. Some were just poor bodies running away from  trouble; 
"We  can bide  our time, we can keep our  thoughts in our  hearts,  deploring "
a-cutting down trees as he  shouldn't. They didn't ought to be  felled: it's 
"Kerri Millward,4041378193999,09-03-1998
"
     There was no answer. 
"and  Ents, you know; or there  are Ents and things that look like  Ents  but "
"     For about an hour they went on, silently, in  single file, oppressed by "
"have I been? Just a  nuisance: a  passenger, a piece  of luggage. And now  I "
"Loralee Hadfield,4297622022256023,02-10-1994
"
"####-     'I am Gildor,' answered their leader, the Elf who had first hailed him. "
much for his good and all these great Men as for anyone else. 
"the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the  green  mounds,  and the "
"swooped near, venturing almost within bowshot of the walls, now they circled "
useless. 
wonders.' 
"that, vanishing quickly into the shadows of the  rocks and  trees. Soon only "
"darkly up at the  guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a mind to "
"     `Let's  find a place to lie up in,' he said. 'Not lower down. Higher up "
ha! ha! 
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are orcs and 
"stride of Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.' "
against a light in the doorway. 
     One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne 
"with their captors, before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of them. "
kept  him  from  sending  the  dwarves off  at once  like  suspicious beggars. He never 
"growing. As for Treebeard, he first laved his feet  in the basin beyond  the "
they could all be collected again from the four corners of the world. The one thing 
"since the orc-raid, and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been "
####-reminder of  her  presence  Gollum  scowled and  flinched. He  halted  their 
     'Come!' the  Elves called to the hobbits. 'Come!  Now is  the time  for 
sent  now  to be your guide again.  The Dimrill Dale is  full of vapour  and 
"able  to stand again, and  walk.  But  in any case  we  had better start  by "
took him within the tent. 
"     `There is some new devi lry here,' he said, 'devised for our welcome  no "
"shall learn soonest,  maybe,  if  I  keep you beside  me. The esquire of  my "
"Ewart Scrase,4041592983848473,08-07-1998
"
"""Well,  well!""  said  a  voice.  ""Just  look!  Bilbo  the  hobbit  on  a  pony,  my  dear! "
"breeze in his hair and on his face; but at length the cries of the dwarves, who were "
"hills fell into shadow, and  the Sun  grew round and  red.  Here and there a  "
"     They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, and "
"together, and  we will. I shall go,  unless they chain me up.  There must be "
"Faydra Glen,4516052691160,10-02-1991
"
back and down the better.' 
"return, you may  soon learn the  answers  there. My part in the  Company was "
"     The weather was still grey and overcast,  with  wind from the East, but "
"easily than I do, he must attend on his  lord  again within this hour. Come, "
"     They hastened up the  last slope, and stood breathless beside her. They "
"now? What's your little game?  It isn't time yet. It can't be tea -time even, "
"Gandalf  and Bilbo had  come  all  the way back,  along both  edges of  the Forest,  to "
"ever, but wished us to think so; for  he began to lust  for  it for himself. "
there was no wish for any uncanny events in the Common Room again. 
was very great. Each hobbit had a guard of three. Pippin was far back in the 
"Gandalf. `Nonetheless I do not ask  your  pardon, Master Elrond. For if that "
"Lord of  the  City might use that  way, or those who  bore the token of  the "
bellied  pony  that  was  always  thinking  of  rolling  on  the  grass.  In  this  way  at  last 
 
 
"     `Lie  flat and still!' hissed  Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shade "
"Torrey Nottram,4041371064601,17-11-1981
"
put the roads in order.' 
"####-Bilbo's eyes were seldom wrong. The eagles were coming down the wind, line "
""
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should 
""
     'Does not the Black Gate lie yonder?' said she. 'And must he not now be 
"and on some were standing  stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of "
"Tim Sillito,4789283772204,18-01-1987
"
vision; and  they  brought forth few  comments other than: 'You  don't  say; 
nervously what the end of it all would be 
"see  gardens  and  a  cluster  of  low  wooden  buildings,  some  thatched  and  made  of "
"old man, he knelt on one knee,  and took  his hand and kissed it. 'May I lay "
of  the  path.  Yet  the  light  only  showed  them  endless  lines  of  straight  grey  trunks 
came  back to the  Shire. but each had great comfort  in his friends  on the 
"     `That shall be told,' said Elrond. "
"bargain  with  my friend  that, if  all  goes well,  we  will  visit Fangorn "
wish I could hear it told! Do you think they'll say:  Now comes the story of 
far  from the  road. There  they lay  flat. Frodo  hesitated  for  a second: 
"Margery Jansson,4041594195092296,19-02-1985
"
"Helen-elizabeth Antonoyev,4041370344074554,18-10-1999
"
""
"the marshes. The reek of them came to their nostrils, heavy and foul even in "
there was  something  odd  about his master's  mood and that the  matter was 
happen.  His guards had gone to  join in the  fray. In the twilight he saw a  
     'Show me  the  precious  Ring!'  he said suddenly  in the  midst of the 
"     Wide wonder came into Jomer's eyes. 'Strider is too poor a name, son of "
from the earth beneath the City. For a searing second it stood dazzling  far 
sun! ' He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks and turned 
"something for me? You've  only to name it,  I said. I'm in a hurry,  said he, "
"sound,  except  an occasional drip  of  moisture falling  through  the still "
elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.' 
"of the cliff, as if he  would bore a hole  into it  with his eyes. Gimli was "
"has  been short,  and now  it is drawing to an end.  I release you from  the "
"afraid  of them, and distrustful of those  that  had dealings with them; and "
passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid 
unfought  - not if there  is a captain  here who has still the courage to do 
pocket  almost without  thinking;  certainly  it  did  not  seem  of  any  particular  use  at 
us to kindle no more lights or fires than  barest need asked. So it has been 
"     When the old  man,  helped by  Bilbo  and  some  dwarves,  had finished  "
"     'Do  you wonder at that,  Ring-bearer?' said  Arwen.  'For you know the "
"     Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture, "
     `But not the nice hobbit? ' 
else  concerning  the  Great  Battle  that was fought  upon Dagorlad  in the 
     'Burn him alive?' said Gandalf. 'What is this tale? Be quick!' 
"     'Twice  now, lord, I have heard  of the  Paths of the  Dead,'  he  said. "
stirred their cloaks: the chill wind of dawn. 
"the proud peoples of the  North,  who  often had assailed us, men of  fierce "
"     For a moment Faramir's restraint gave way. 'I would ask you, my father, "
 
"the Orcs. Brm,  hoom! Worse than that: he  has been doing something to them; "
"Legolas. 'The Orcs have run before us, as if  the very whips  of Sauron were "
"spoke  again. Finally  both  arms,  with long fingers  flexed and twitching, "
"he  felt  himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir "
with h im for  nothing? ' And then he remembered his own voice speaking 
resist  him was greater long ago; and  not all Men were estranged from them. 
""
"and  get advice or permission.  No, it's sit here till they come and kill me "
is largely  on account of  Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those 
""
"Bartholemy Blundan,4041591632699758,02-04-1978
"
on  his  side. Gollum  was  not to be seen. Various  reproachful  names  for  
dragon-spell. But plucking up courage he spoke again. 
"against Jomer,  and his fury had betrayed him.  The great wrath of his onset "
anxiously  at  the  eagle  who  was  perched  close  by.  He  wondered  what  other 
"Juan Boldry,4041598180244226,25-10-1978
"
"walls of  stone behind  great  walls, and  frowning precipices wreathed with "
He'll  raise the alarm. The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us by morning. 
####- 
 
"     It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked "
"the Precious will be angry. We are  going back now, up the stream. Go on, go "
"said. 'Sleepy heads,  yes, sleepy  heads! Leave good  Smjagol to watch!  But "
"had lots of chances, like us, of turning back, only they didn't. And if they "
swift-flying messengers  flew  here  and  there  across  the  sky.  Above  the  borders  of 
"Darrick Dinjes,4017956385401282,01-12-1994
"
with the good will of all good men!' he said. 
"of  its evil  uses not  of its good.  The  world is changing, you say. Minas "
the  lands  round Whitwell  near  Tuckborough in  the  Shire.  I  am  nearly 
"Bilbo. The weather  was still calm  and fair, after one  of the  most lovely "
"     The sun rose and  passed  overhead unseen, and began to sink,  and  the "
"day; fresh from the sea. Most Precious Gollum! Must have it. We wants it, we "
harsh croak was heard. 
the tunnel they were following; and they were getting deadly tired. 
"still dwelt there of the D®nedain, the kings of Men that  came over the  Sea  "
"Jody Metham,4041596323414359,14-10-1991
"
"small flowers in close  grass and wet crannies, wandering at  last up  on to "
"     'I serve only the Lord  of the  Mark, Thjoden  King  son  of  Thengel,' "
"bedside, for it seemed to  him that  his friend looked worse, and a greyness "
     'An Ent?' said  Merry.  'What's  that? But  what do you  call yourself?  
over the hedge. 
"and held up  a long pale sword. And as he did so a great  fear  fell on all, "
"which  had  at  first  been  direct  towards  the  Mountain,  he  hastened  now  down  the "
"like Shelob's, only invisible. He could see no obstacle,  but  something too "
"doubted  that  he  was  really  a  first-class  burglar,  in  spite  of Gandalf's words,  they "
"There seemed to be a great  blackness looming slowly out of the East, eating  "
myself. A habit of the old: they choose  the wisest  person present to speak 
"Alane Thwaites,4017953006333267,12-12-1997
"
"Georgeta Cobbin,4657404936619412,01-06-1977
"
reason to believe that the halfling's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long 
coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go  with all the speed that we 
"Wren Boullen,4017956735602894,18-12-1991
"
"Ingaborg Noone,4041591339155,15-09-1986
"
Stop your spinning and look for me! 
"Booth Tree,4041372954853889,29-03-1995
"
"before  you  get  to  the  other  side),  and  nuts  are  about  all  that  grows  there  fit  for "
"Karyn Janatka,4268575772073,17-09-1997
"
"passed,  and  a new  moon waxed  and waned  in  the world  outside, while we "
"stream.  Dwalin  had  just  scrambled  out  with  the  coiled  rope  on  his  arm,  and "
"He got up trembling. He had less than half a mind to fetch the lamp, and more "
"Aurilia Andres,4685177728658071,23-11-1980
"
"'The Lord drives his son too hard, and  now he must do the duty of  two, for  "
"Homer Coldman,4041378853352,31-08-1982
"
"pleased  about  it.  After  that  their  going  was  slower,  for  most  of  the  time  they "
"sooner or  later  - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but "
it. 
his leg and threw him. 
"     Suddenly,  as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement, his back to  the "
you and all your works have perished -- and the works of your dark master to 
"fiercely  angry  because  of  the  death  of  the  Great  Goblin,  and  also  because  of  the "
he  had fallen. Most of the  Hobbits  and the Men of Bree went off then  and 
Chapter 3. The Ring Goes South 
"     'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry. "
splinters of wood. The Company retreated  to the other  side of the chamber. 
"     Long  ago Gorhendad Oldbuck,  head of the  Oldbuck family,  one of  the "
"""O  no!  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  were  more  than  six  ponies,  for  there  were "
I 
"     'No mail have we to fit you,' said Jowyn, 'nor any time for the forging "
"Benetta Lenglet,4017955839942503,07-04-1987
"
"bright sword advanced,  Frodo,  hobbit of the Shire, walked steadily down to "
"I  should guess, not much interested in anything  that we have done or seen, "
sun on the leaves; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs I have ever  
"wholly cure, not even Gandalf.' "
"Anbrion, became great lords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the "
point you choose. Let us go!' 
"distance is not great: the head of the Rapids is but half  a mile below  us,  "
cried. 'And pardon me! I thought--' 
"him, tearing aside his veils, and troubled with  tidings of  bold spies that "
     'Shall I always be chosen?' she  said bitterly. 'Shall I always be left  
     of meadow-flowers and butterflies 
everyone back! ' 
"     and bundled him into the Moon, "
"grey cloud, and at his feet  a little whining  dog. Yet the two were in some "
     Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?' 
"""You ask first,"" he said, because he had not had time to think of a riddle. "
"Howie Rawcliffe,4260102349441189,22-09-1991
"
Ladies with all their wisdom. Their plans  have gone wrong. I can't be their 
"I had  many  duties that  I did not neglect, and  many  other interests as a  "
was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not known before. 
not seem always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded  in an odd 
from the ruin of the town the head of their host passed the rock-gates at the end of 
"reverence; and they did not burn it, but laid it  to rest in the silence  of "
     But Boromir did not speak again. 
"misty as the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale sky  like a high white "
""
     Then with  a crash came  a great ringing shou t:  ra-hoom-rah! The trees 
"new work as he lifted it carefully out, ""this is a beginning!"" "
"Gan Chatten,4444266932728,01-10-1987
"
"Ragnar Wash,4041597127745,01-03-1984
"
 
 
"Dedie Patis,4853606566600,02-04-1985
"
bowed. 
"becoming  choked  and  dazed  for  want  of  air,  they  could  bear  it  no  longer.  They "
"""Twelve  yards!  I  should  have  thought  it was  thirty  at  least,  but my  eyes  don't "
 
"Pip Didsbury,4041599571250137,16-08-1987
"
not seen the nightfall. ' 
"eye, and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire - and of the winged "
he lifted from his breast the green stone that lay there. 'But Strider shall 
garrison at Osgiliath?' 
"     How many there were the Company could  not count. The affray was sharp, "
"     The  hurrying  darkness, now gathering  great speed, rushed up from the "
""
"back  into  his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of "
were the tunnels and deep armouries that the servants of Mordor had made for  
That night the dwarves slept little. The morning was still pale when they saw a 
if some seem to have been passed over  that  may be because I have failed to  
     'You  idiotic fool!' Pippin muttered  to himself. 'You're going  to get 
 
"Battle  of  Dagorlad before  the  Black Gate of  Mordor,  where  we had  the "
"first to speak with the King of Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend. "
"     'Tonight at least you should wear one,' said Gandalf. "
"eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.' "
aloud. 
whispering along the ground a thin cold air. 
they stood right before the wall at the Gate. 
"heir;  and of him Elwing  the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his "
"####-tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.' "
"Niles Linch,4827400013100,20-11-1979
"
came 
"laughter,  and to eating and  drinking. And laugh  they  did,  and  eat, and "
"end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing north towards  the doors, was "
"forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was  selling Bag End, indeed "
     The  hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. `I  
forward and climbed down the deep-cloven bank and stepped into the stream. 
"of course;  but anyway  I think he has not much grit, not much plain courage "
"     'I will look at the ground when we come there,' said Aragorn. "
"them, till they come to its end.' "
"     Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently "
"Wolves  and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him.  I  had to choose, "
"lunch-time,  and most  of  the  things  had  already  been  sold,  for  various  prices  from "
"Kingston Ravel,4041599487879383,18-07-2001
"
he said. 
"""Gandalf got  here first. So I know as much about you  as I need, and I know "
""
"wish he had not kept the  Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had "
"""I gave it them!"" squeaked Bilbo, who was peeping over the wall, by now, in a "
from the hillside there was a water-gate. There the rocky roof came down close to 
nowadays.' 
book. I  have thought  of  a nice ending for it:  and he lived happily  ever 
"history; and some as different  as one tree-kind from another, as birch from "
"of tents and booths, and lines of picketed horses,  and great store of arms, "
return.  But the  bitter  truth  came  home to him  at  last:  at best their 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in  THE RETURN OF THE KING . 
even as they ran Frodo looked back and saw with terror that at once the eyes 
"bank,  but when  they  looked  back  the far shore was shrouded in mist, and "
of tall images graven in cold stone. 
"     Mourn not overmuch! Mighty was the fallen, "
"     '  ""It is forty leagues and  two from Pelargir to  the  landings at the "
must hurry. Not safe to stay in the open in these places. Make haste! ' 
     He  woke. Cold air blew on his  face. He was lying on his back. Evening  
"fields. But that was quite by accident.  We  lost our way in the woods, back  "
"thought boats as bad as wild horses, or worse, and not  all the dangers that "
"     `Well, I can  remember three  nights  there for certain,  and I seem to "
"     'Yes, several, a nd all are dark and unpleasant,' said Frodo. "
"     'And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back  the Nine,' said Galdor. "
wonder how  they would like  it  in  Lugb®rz. They might think  that Ugl®k's 
"Bilbo  almost  stopped  breathing,  and  went  stiff  himself. He was desperate. He "
"dangerously far.  Why could not his master see?  It was dim, certainly,  but "
descended in  many curves down  to the  narrow  land  under  the  shadow  of 
"and Elves, terrible Elves  with  bright eyes. I can't find it. Ach! ' He got "
"long-fingered hands,  its knotted and twisted trunk gaping  in wide fissures "
silver light the swelling grass-lands  rose and fell  like a wide  grey sea. 
and east. Hobbits must make haste!' 
"wont. `Gandalf the Grey  set out  with the Company, but he did  not pass the "
"could but go and see, and anything was better than little supper, less breakfast, and "
"Christoph Friedenbach,4017951838871322,28-10-1999
"
has  somewhat to  report. If these old  tales speak true that have come down 
"through  the fluttering leaves,  which were still green  upon the  tree.  He "
"     'I  think you should still follow that  plan,'  said Gildor.  'I do not "
     `What's the time? ' he said sleepily. 
as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White  Rider. We are 
"and realm has rested in the charge of the  Stewards for many long years, and "
     'And that's enough! ' said Sam. `Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a 
part.' 
"your foes. It will be less  now, I fear; for I will not leave my strongholds "
""
so on with  a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and again they thought 
"     'It  is true that  I  wish to  go back to the Shire,' said Frodo.  'But "
"'Keep your eyes open,  Mr. Frodo! There's  a bottle full of water. Drink up. "
"carved,  gleaming dully with gold and half-seen  colours.  Many woven cloths "
them. It leaped into all their minds that the Black Wings had spied them and 
"his wrath, they were dismayed, and their  horses were stricken with madness. "
"Joceline Eathorne,4041375994514,13-10-1986
"
"Danella Flanner,4041593509930720,23-02-1975
"
"mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down the northward  slope. "
'Has anything happened?' he asked. 
     Farmer  Cotton's household  and  all  his  guests  were  up  early next 
"and of  adding  to  his  name, if  required, a number: such  as Isengrim the "
""
"instance,  seemed numerous.  But  most of them  had natural  names,  such as "
craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs.  
"man was frowning at first, but  they did  their very best  to be frightfully polite, and "
led the way. 
utterly left behind and have to stay lurking as a permanent burglar in the elf-caves 
"Shagrat could not  both fight and  keep hold  of his treasure.  He  stopped, "
"     'That depends on the manner of your return,' said Denethor. "
"Ermanno Hissett,4017953892221,10-05-1991
"
"forward, and finding the body of the goblin  he  drew from its sheath a long "
"set forth. Long  past it now seems,  yet it was but the morn of  the day ere "
"Frodo  has gone by boat, and his servant has  gone with him. Frodo must have "
"were gathered little watch-fires sprang up,  golden-red  in the  darkness, a  "
"Pippin chuckled,  but Sam looked indignant. 'That won't  help  you  much; it "
"with a rush the wind came upon  them, hissing and snarling over the marshes.  "
suddenly. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'But you are all in white!' 
"Shurlocke Eveque,4041374671543,09-11-1994
"
but still unabated the flames danced and  flickered among the ruins. Then in 
"     'Now for  the other!' said Ugl®k.  Pippin saw him go  to Merry, who was "
""
"banks went  swiftly  by.  But  they  saw little  of the  country,  for  they "
"and  broken,  so  that  he may come  to you, and you  shall see what you have  "
"     But in the village of Bywater all  the houses and holes  were shut, and "
tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these the hobbits saw thickets 
"     Slowly  they crawled  up  to the edge of  the  ring  again,  and peered "
water down here  fit for an  Ent to drink. or to bathe in. So I will ask you  
""
"and he felt weak and old, and the sunlight seemed thin. He was roused by the "
""
"     'That  is Weathertop,' said Strider. 'The Old Road,  which we have left  "
dreadful dragging weight of the  accursed  Ring.  But it was not so. Whether  
""
most  needed  and  least  expected!  The  oftener  you  appear  in  my  halls  the  better 
many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of 
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell. 
"we  have, somewhat less than ten  miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the "
"Swanfleet  river, and  found the  old ford, east of the  falls where it went "
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking 
Chapter 5. The Bridge of Khazad-dym 
them back northward for a while along the way they had come; then he slanted 
"weariness, fear, and sadness.  "
"and  seeing the  travellers, stopped short and stared  at  them  with  great "
"     They felt the Orc's arms  trembling violently. 'Curse  you, you  filthy "
"Yorke Clowsley,4017953140084,28-04-1981
"
"     'No,' said Gandalf. 'That is not  the road that  you must take. I  have "
"wavering light behind; in one hand it held a sword, the very  light of which "
####- 
"one might hear an  old gaffer  in an inn, aft er  a good pint  of well-earned "
"as  a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred  wrinkles of laughter.  In  his "
"what things  were like, they decided to go straight to Hobbiton. So the next "
"Obadias Ravelus,4041595196734,18-08-1998
"
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away  by a demand for more ale  and his 
"the helms gleamed with a  flame of silver, for they were indeed  wrought  of "
"you were born to grace it. There is a road out of this valley, and that road "
all?' 
"tower, was wrapped in a brooding gloom. "
"####-with invisible fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as  he "
"complete in items  but not in references,  since for the present  purpose it "
driven out of  the waste-lands. Indeed the  waste in  time will be  waste no 
"doom, a Fell Rider of the air.' "
"handle him. There he goes, away down by the  ford, like a  shadow among  the "
"after his escape, and  after food and a draught  of the  cordial; but  now a  "
"Bombur  slept  on with  a  smile  on  his  fat  face,  as  if  he  no  longer  cared  for  all  the "
"the  crumbs  and   cracker -paper,  the  forgotten   bags  and   gloves   and "
"that he was a hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that,  I  suppose,  he "
"king. ""He would have done better to have remained my guest. It is an ill wind, all "
"sound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad and shallow;  "
"     Swan the whitest, serpent coldest... "
"Allina Mongain,4041377766910,14-08-1988
"
"to be kept safe, or we're all as good as dead.' "
"Shire-services,  and the Messengers  were the  most  numerous,  and much the "
####-out of  here. Now what's to be done? You can't go walking  in the Black Land 
"showed them the gates and  pushed them out: before the year's end, that was; "
"     Gimli stared with wide eyes. `Durin's Bane! ' he cried, and letting his "
"Kitti Orto,4041370093007,11-06-1983
"
doors  and look abroad.  Too  long have  you sat in  shadows and  trusted to 
"Forest, a sort  of colony from the Shire. Its  chief village was Bucklebury, "
wakes 
"     Sam did likewise, and put aside his  orc-gear; and he took  out all the "
for tidings. You heard that we are pursuing an orc-host that carried off our 
"Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the  lightfooted, in the days of our  youth! -- they "
####-     The hobbits recoiled. But Frodo said: 'Do  not believe him! He has lost  
crossed the fords I thought that  I heard them. Now we  are sure.  They  are 
"     'He was,' said  Aragorn; 'and also  Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan. "
"last  of  the  wains that bear away to refuge the aged the children, and the "
applauding. 
short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.' 
"flash  of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and fled, and for a second they  "
"the news more comfortable. I've a  drop  of good ale on tap, if you and your  "
"him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the Elves to do so. I do not "
"dared to come to Henneth  Annyn,  and his life is forfeit.  I marvel at  the "
weighing up their strength and courage. 
went slanting  up towards the north  end  of  the hill-brow  under which  it 
"Ferris Merryfield,4041371552142,02-08-1981
"
"Aragorn; but the Grey  Company in their haste rode like hunters, until their "
"     'You are  not fit for  such a  journey,' said  Aragorn. 'But  do not be "
"Seka Muneely,4017951357333738,02-12-1987
"
"his left hand. And behold! there  lay his weapon, but the blade  was smoking  "
"All  that  had  happened  after  he  was  stunned,  Bilbo  learned  later;  but  it  gave "
"helped a  little,  for there  were only five, not  nine,  when your camp was "
"possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool!  to keep it secret, for  "
"     'Don't  be  so gloomy!' cried Pippin.  'The Sun is shining, and here we "
"light, as they moved in ceaseless patrol. "
"""Truly  songs  and  tales  fall  utterly  short  of  the  reality,  O  Smaug  the  Chiefest "
Westernesse.' 
could see cool sunlight and green grass again!' 
Frodo from far away looked on that same moon as it set beyond Gondor ere the 
"deep, but  it looked ugly, and  Aragorn's face  was grave as he examined it. "
"be felt, as if it  were a  thick veil that cut  them off from all the  world "
"     For  MILO BURROWS,  hoping it will be  useful, from B.B., on a gold pen "
halted and turned  about neighing  fiercely. There were  Nine  Riders at the 
"     `Yes,' he answered. `I will say no more yet.' "
 
"their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They  "
"     `How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. "
morning-light.' 
"admit,' he added with a queer laugh,  'that I hoped you would take to me for  "
"     'And  tonight he is shrouded anyway,' Gimli murmured.  'Would  that the "
Bombadil's not as blind  as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand's 
"     'You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?' Faramir asked of the latest comer. "
     In the midst of these  gloomy  thoughts  he suddenly remembered that he 
"Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the Forest River ran out. "
"'Leader!' said  Merry. 'Order your  fellows back to their places at once, if "
"     `And I will choose you companions to go with  you, as far as  they will "
"wonder, Frodo?' "
lowest dungeon to the highest peak  it climbed. ascending in unbroken spiral 
Precious.' 
"     'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?' "
"sent a message by my friends, and we are expected."" "
all. 
"days' wonder.  The  legal  bother,  indeed,  lasted  for  years.  It was  quite  a  long  time "
     Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea. That house 
"invited. A very few were overlooked  by accident, but  as they turned up all "
####-down Saruman's throat.' 
"     'You  can come too,'  said  Frodo, 'and  bring  all the water -bottles.' "
     `So all my  plan is spoilt!  ' said Frodo.  `It is  no good  trying  to 
"He will not  serve, only command. He  lives now  in  terror of the shadow of "
"Moria -gate, or  scale the pathless mountains, or swim the  Great  River  all "
"re-entered Mordor has not changed, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the "
"     there strong and free a storm arose, "
branded with  the foul token of the Lidless Eye. But marred  and dishonoured 
"one  fearful  eye  upwards. Smaug  stirred  a wing,  opened  a  claw,  the  rumble  of  his "
"Nehemiah Plampeyn,4041379246868716,31-07-1981
"
"they all felt in need of rest. As they rode down the steep path, Bilbo heard the elves "
"     `But folk  must  grow weary  there, even  in their  gardens, as  do all "
truth it was only a little while. But now he saw that they were in danger of 
this. 
"thing  that  even Tom could  not be sure  of  for long, and it would  change "
"would be enough  to wake  the dragon and all his  relatives, and kill  the  lot of us.  I "
"Kelly Testo,4041596057737,02-08-1998
"
"quickly,  in bear's  shape  at  any  rate. From  the burnt wolf-glade he had soon found "
words 
"Balin,  who  was  wondering  where  in  all  this  commotion  Bilbo  was,  knew  what "
"Filmore Gladdis,4734693510622936,10-07-1976
"
the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen.  The  shoulders of  the mountain  to 
     `Three times! ' he  whimpered.  'Three times is  a threat. They feel us 
shaven crown. 
"     In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off with "
After that they stopped pleading. Then they took off their clothes and bathed in 
West. 
""
"ugly pale bricks,  badly laid. Inside  it was damp and cheerless, and supper "
that no  thought  of remaining there  was in their minds.  They packed up as 
in Bilbo's time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the 
 
"here, from this Crack of Doom,  if  that's its name. Now couldn't  we? Come, "
have finished eating-you shall fill  your pipes and light up. And  then for a  
"Bendick Wenderott,4017957688856,26-04-1994
"
holes. 
the edge high above  them they saw against the sky a horse  standing. Beside 
next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in 
and of the bickerings of the Lake-men and the Wood-elves about the upkeep of the 
"the poor little hobbit could be seen kneeling on the hearth-rug, shaking like a jelly "
reckon we  crossed half the distance before we stopped. One more day will do 
####-became very hot. 
"now partly hold,  and issue from it to harry our lands. Bu t  that night  all "
"Mable Accomb,4041590158375488,27-04-1987
"
"Renato Yakubowicz,4017956416812,23-11-1976
"
sunrise. 
     But now  the dark  swooping shadows  were  aware  of  the newcomer. One 
"and some of their virtue has one, he said, but here I have still some of the "
was a legend of vague fear: 
"them. 'Well, Master Samwise,'  she said.  'I hear and see that you have used "
"####-Yet maybe at last the time foretold has come, and Aragorn may pass.' "
"water, and chuckled to himself, sometimes even croaking in a sort of song. "
or we'll change  it for you.  You little folk are getting too  uppish. Don't  
reckoning  of years. For it was in the  one thousand  six hundred  and first  
"     'Whatever it  is,' said Pippin, 'Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you  "
""
     'Slam the doors and wedge them! ' shouted Aragorn. 'And keep your packs 
"spy things out a bit!"" "
your torches in Westfold  and  the children  that lie dead  there?  And they 
goblins kept from the wolves and carried back as prisoners to their caves. 
"shall be hard at work tonight clearing the cellars of the empty wood, so let us have "
from  something that I  was dreaming about.  I didn't understand that it was 
"man of  the  sort  in  these parts  looking  for  a  Job  at once,  and  that he had arranged "
"The  dwarves  groaned  and  looked  most  distressed,  and  Bilbo wept.  They  had "
as if Pippin  had declared the lane was the slot leading to  a dragon's den. 
"Rosaleen Pamphilon,4041379165236,30-01-1985
"
"nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer  of the wizard's staff. He "
Also  they  reminded  him  of  days  when  he  had  been  less  lonely  and  sneaky  and 
"####-for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted  by curses and threats.  "
"deep,  and disturbed that from which they fled,  Durin's  Bane. Of what they "
"Minas Tirith,' answered Boromir.  `But I  am not the leader of the Company.' "
""
away. The Mountain too slept uneasily. 
####-     Another  harsh  horn-call and shrill cries  rang out.  Feet were coming 
through and caught a glimpse of great passages and of the dim beginnings of wide 
were destroyed  in the war that  brought the North Kingdom to  its  end. But 
"     'You know the  answers,' said Gandalf: 'no and no. But in  any case the "
were listen ing and the  tall rocks leaning over them. But Frodo did not heed 
"once,  and the glimmer  of him  faded soon  from  sight. And  all that night "
"journey, a  reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my  task  was done, and I could "
"""We must take our chance of that,"" said Thorin. ""We can go no further to-day."" "
"long way, and he  grew hot and  very hungry; and night closed down swift and "
"     The  path  went on again from the door, and turning to the right  again "
"Adrian Burberow,4041379119780121,31-03-1977
"
"circlet.  Above the mail was a short surcoat  of black, but broidered on the "
fate of Lothlurien you are not answerable but only for the doing of your own  
     'Were you not at the Council?  ' answered Frodo. `Because we cannot use  
"you were going away, so I didn't see the use of denying  it. Wonderful folk, "
"Shurlock Glendinning,4017955598891,09-03-1989
"
"Lark Elstow,4660456278898652,15-07-1976
"
"Fredericka Sparke,4553068013410,07-03-1976
"
"     'Yes, sir!' said Sam.  'Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant  no wrong "
"whispering; and they learned that  he belonged to Skinbark's people, and the  "
"garments, all of black and silver. He  had a small hauberk, its rings forged "
"Giffer Cupitt,4017954287710,26-10-1981
"
"Deep, and there they rested two  days. Then Legolas  repaid  his  promise to "
     Neither  Pippin nor Merry remembered  much  of the later  part  of  the 
"what to  do. They just want  a match, though, and they'll go up in fire. The "
"its chain about his neck, he felt himself enlarged, as if he were robed in a  "
sky. He could not see Gollum. He went forward  a  short way and Anborn  
did not want to have any more  to do with the party. He gave orders for more 
"your  distress,  and  in  recompense  you  have  thus  far  brought  ruin  only,  though "
"     'Footpads, eh?'  said the man: 'So that's your tone, is  it? Change it, "
"could  not  then  guess, but I  learned  that you had been in Bree the night "
that can be seen in the bad air. They will come soon and speak to me here.' 
"""Then what is Durin's Day?"" asked Elrond. "
""
"began  the planning of a new  town, designed more fair and  large even  than before, "
he 
he sat down again in his cha ir. 
"of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my  days in answering "
"present  plight,  and  I  need  a  little  help myself. We  have  no  food,  and  no  baggage, "
"Halbarad.  'She wrought it in secret,  and long was the making. But she also "
spoken softer in the  Inn at  Bree! That spear-thrust would have  skewered a  
him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust  still in Michel Delving 
"of  a rock -wall, a furlong or more from the shore. We did not find where the "
"solid, while all the woods and land about them  receded as  if into a  mist. "
round the  fire upon the grass or  upon the  sawn  rings of old trunks. Some 
"     The winged creature screamed at her, but the Ringwraith made no answer, "
"of  the earth endured the terror, unmoving,  steadfast as  a graven image in "
"De witt Cartmer,4720181923197056,20-09-1975
"
Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought 
though they had been newly chiselled. A  few  scorings. and small flake-like 
"####-     'In the House of Eorl,' answered Hbma. "
"trust, and who would be willing  to go by your side  -  and that you would be "
hobbit's toes.' 
"     And dive into the water deep, "
"watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.' "
"     'I read the  signs  aright,'  he  said  to himself. 'Frodo  ran  to the "
the light: a ring  of gold  that made its  wearer invisible. It was the  one 
"     'This is the only way,' whispered Gollum. 'No paths beyond the road. No "
"set off for  Bag End to protest, but he never got there. Ruffians laid hands "
"still  standing  outside  the  door,  and  laughing  long  but  quietly.  After  a  while  he "
     `There!' said Merry  panting. `We  have lugged up your blankets as well 
"Bilbo,' he said. 'You make that clearer with every word you say. It has  got "
"Jennifer Gornall,4880685929270093,09-02-2000
"
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round  the  feet  of 
Those  were  perhaps  the  worst  moments  they  had  been  through  yet.  The 
"Madlin Duffell,4041594998783,11-05-1999
"
given  me a  little  more time and more Men. Still  I have already done much  
     'Isengard began to fill up with black  creeping streams and pools. They 
"hasten, I will sting your miserable feet. So be swift!"" "
"following the very track  that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many "
     Yjni ve lintl yuldar avbnier 
"     `Did you see them  again, Mr . Frodo?' asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and "
the stars. 
clamour?  After  all  the  disturbance  you  have  made  I  have  a  right  to  know  what 
the only thing  that could have roused the dying embers of Frodo's heart and  
"Dorry Ferreo,4041594141607403,24-11-1981
"
"'Supper is ready,'  said Goldberry; and now the  hobbits  saw that  she  was "
 
"     'At that his breath came like  the hiss of snakes, and all who stood by "
     'So Saruman would not leave?' he said. 'I did  not think  he would. His 
had vanished in Strider's  hands. `Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf.  `It  is 
they were destroyed or driven east into the hills. 
"Kayle Topes,4041374140457,28-08-1984
"
"conversation in The  Green Dragon at Bywater,  one evening in the spring  of "
"Tommie Skipton,4041599017977111,11-09-1997
"
"     on high above the mists he came, "
"Garry Lambie,4017952906837856,02-07-1990
"
and  they  are little more than a mile long.  Not far beyond them the stream 
"Kippie Dadson,4041377611447,04-01-1993
"
"spread from  glen to glen, from the Ephel D®ath to the eastern hills, to Dol "
"     Sam scratched his head. `Must really be asleep,' he muttered. `And if I "
"and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for "
"     'Where are you going, Master?' cried Sam, though at last he  understood "
     And whither then? I cannot say. 
came  in-no  songs  had  alluded  to  him  even  in  the  obscurest way-was asked  for  in 
"Beornings of the Wood,  among whom may still be seen many men tall and "
"and who it belongs to, and so on and further."" "
"water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before  the  threat  of their "
withdrawn. 
me.' 
because he had borne them so far with so much toil. Hardest of all it was to 
"####-underneath us  and  the  forest beginning  to blaze  in places, when  the goblins  came "
"they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out  of the  shadows. They "
"low over it, looking like a greedy  child stooping over a bowl of food, in a  "
And what is Isildur's Bane? ' 
     'They have taken the wall!' men cried. 'They are blasting  breaches  in 
""
"     I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold  there grew:  "
"voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring up  the gully and away "
up to  the ears.  'Here's our collector of  information! And he  collected a  
"arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed  him.  And my  sword burned all away like a "
towards the Gate. Great weariness began to come over him; but it was well before 
"left here. And my search would  have been in vain,  but for the  help that I "
realized  suddenly  that he loved the old hobbit  dearly. Most of the guests 
large!' 
had  come to them in the night was gone again to  a war with powers too dark 
sick that on the Halfling and  on the Lady of Rohan this malady lay heavily.  
"Charlean Leftwich,4017954253287776,27-03-1986
"
Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his 
"Wang Dennerley,4685823020924,12-07-1995
"
stones towards the Dwimorberg. 'Of the Paths of the Dead?' 
"     'As you  will,' said  Gandalf. 'Aragorn shall  come with  me.  Let  the "
"     `Not bad,' Bilbo said to him. `You  would have made a good story of it, "
"high and flat-topped, and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standing "
somehow.' 
lodging is prepared for you; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the 
"Then Bilbo  turned  away,  and  he went  by  himself,  and  sat  alone wrapped  in  a "
"last they got the idea that enemies were in Buckland, some strange  invasion "
"wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for  "
"marching  with  many  spearmen  and  bowmen;  and  crows  were  gathered  thick, "
mightier men had she seen than the D®nedain and the fair sons of Elrond; but 
Isildur's Bane. Yet death  maybe  was  better  than  what  else  might  have 
"Jonathan MacAfee,4041596801175,11-09-2001
"
"Harland Scherer,4178923801114670,03-06-1980
"
it  has happened  since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire 
"####-to me as  if  one of those foul flying Riders was about, up in the blackness "
"would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going "
     But still the sunken stars appear 
"####-talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask. "
""
"beard hung down below his waist, and immense black boots. "
great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A reek came on 
Even to the  Mere  of Dead Faces some haggard phantom of  green spring 
by its shores. But on the field where they now stood  a great host was drawn 
smiled  and laughed happily. Every  item  of news  from the Shire that Frodo 
streams. Sometimes where the way  was  broader he  had ridden at  the king's 
he said to Frodo. 
"     Out from the White Tower they walked, as if to a funeral,  out into the "
"might be  a  play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with "
wolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me. 
     On  down  the grey road they went beside  the  Snowbourn rushing on its 
"about them. Above them was a dome  of pale sky  barred  with fleeting smoke, "
found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the  glimmer grew 
"there  was  a  great clamour, and all  about  them horns and  trumpets  were "
 
"Shadowfax, the most precious of all the king's steeds, chief  of the Mearas, "
"is too little  here that grows and is glad.  If Aragorn comes into his  own, "
In  the Wide World  the Wood-elves  lingered  in  the  twilight of  our Sun  and Moon 
 
and he was gone. 
"""You  don't  know  everything, O  Smaug  the Mighty,""  said  he.  ""Not  gold  alone "
"     Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather, "
"Emyn  Muil. But be that as it may, ancient  tales teach us also the peril of "
"     Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he "
"withdrawn, and darkness  had  come from  East and West, and all  the sky was "
"north,' he said, 'and we must find  some way to  turn back southwards again.  "
to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached  them 
"them, from the Gate of the City  to  the  walls of the  Pelennor.  Then  all "
"swam  before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the "
he had  noticed in the morning. 'You wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark 
"     It was in these  early days,  doubtless, that the Hobbits learned their "
A Short Rest 
been  officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland  'to  do for  Mr. 
the reach of her  sting and of her claws.  Her vast belly was above him with 
     'Let him come!' said Thjoden. 
crack and peeped through; and when  he saw  them standing under the  lamp he 
"Rivendell.  But Narsil was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not "
     'All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I'll just ride on and tell 
"cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.' "
     Then  the old  man looked up. Pippin saw his carven face with its proud 
"great falls drew nearer. Even with such help  as Sam could give, it was hard "
was no other sound. 
"Gayelord Enion,4831457960791,04-04-1977
"
to our Council.' 
"information  they  let  fall, he  soon  realized  that he was very  fortunate  ever  to have "
"Renard Reeman,4041371097254,15-10-1985
"
"Claudius Munton,4017952040053,13-03-1978
"
     Mr. Butterbur shook his head. 'If there's a few decent respectable folk  
"     'Dwarf-doors are  not made to be seen when shut,' said Gimli. `They are "
"Rikki Nekrews,4780287751997,03-03-1988
"
precious! All dead.' 
"watches I have  made up my mind,' he  said. `I  do  not  like the feel of the "
""
`Here is a friend that you have long missed.' 
"     'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well, "
"He'd already bought Sandyman's mill before he came to Bag End, seemingly. "
"shrouded with thick bushes. Passing silently through, Frodo found himself on "
"""You  said  sitting  on  the  doorstep  and  thinking  would  be  my  job,  not  to "
"learned when I was young. But  that was a long, long time ago, and  they may "
river.  His grey  thirsty spirit drew power out of the earth and spread like 
of the king and  of  your brother; and they will not return until  tomorrow.  
did  he speak  of  that road?' He pointed  away along the darkening lines of 
"     'You shall have it! Give  me that basket!' said  Merry, and  rode ahead "
"Vinita Beatens,4479309408634177,08-03-1977
"
the door  and heaved it to; then  he wedged it  with broken sword-blades and 
are doing!' said Legolas.  
####-<h4>Chapter 15</h4> <br> 
"my  dear old  Frodo: you  are miserable, because you don't know how  to  say "
"Sashenka Ince,4041379224961046,22-05-1975
"
Perhaps before long one or two could be chosen to go back to the store by the river 
on a similar morning long ago. 
"strewn with stricken orcs and  men, and a  reek arose of torches cast  away, "
"before  them, and their  eyes were dazzled, for all were  filled with tears. "
"of  sunken  land,  some  ten  miles  wide, lay  between them  and the  river  "
"     '  ""And listen, Gandalf,  my old friend and  helper! ""  he said, coming "
"world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and they heeded less "
stood up in amazement. Even Bard gazed marvelling at it in silence. It was as if a 
"touched it, for a while all thought of the Ring was banished from his  mind. "
"Creight Tollemache,4041592454755,11-02-1986
"
"     foe-beleaguered, fire-encircled. "
empty. 
"     Slowly they  passed through the short heath and  upland grass, speaking "
     Gandalf raised  his  head and  looked  round. `They seem to have made a  
"talking that  way,' said one. 'He'll  get to hear  of it. And if you make so "
"####-     Then all were silent, but at length Faramir said: 'I do not oppose your "
     As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement 
"Rachelle Gabbott,4702816520834,18-11-2001
"
"of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings  with any other folk. Even "
"""I will  give  them  all  a  surprise,""  he  thought,  as  he  crawled  into  the  bushes at "
""
     'No  other way?  ' said  Faramir. `How do  you  know  that? And who has 
east.' 
heard the voices he slipped away.' 
Often  in their  hearts  they thanked the Lady  of  Lurien for  the gift  of 
part of his strength  of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that the 
happening in the Shire?' he said. 
"Chrisy Elston,4041599329919,26-09-1992
"
"killed, but  he would probably make him prisoner and bind him; and certainly "
     `Hey you!' he said roughly. `What are you up to?' 
"Darda Jess,4041372665059,25-07-2001
"
"Zolly Everiss,4017955582975106,02-10-1996
"
     'Lothlurien! '  said  Aragorn. 'Glad I am to hear again the wind in the 
"     The eldest of  these,  and Bilbo's favourite,  was young Frodo Baggins. "
"     'Yes,  you have it,' said Gimli. 'The Lady of  the Wood! She  read many "
to the keeping of the sons of Elrond. 
"     'We must decide before we go further,' answered Gandalf. "
"delighted  you, we  could  have taught  you  much. But  now alas! unless you "
"year in such a journey, and we should pass through many lands that are empty "
"Closer and closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly "
     'Ah!' said  Sam gloomily.  'We'll  just wait long enough for  winter to 
""
"""He is at feast,"" said the captain. "
"1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best home-grown still comes from that district, "
"the ground  and  eye to eye with  a young hobbit, legs well apart, bristling "
high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon his brow. The darkness receded 
"     `As you will,' said  Frodo. 'Even the Elves  do  likewise  at need, and "
"rise  above the far  mountains, and shine  down. Slanting  through the  thin "
"said,  'and I wonder very much what that  means. But  I have found something "
"all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly the walls "
"stripped me of everything; and then two great brutes came and questioned me, "
"Scottie Witard,4017951033309912,21-02-1991
"
"     'Hiding, you mean,'  said  Lobelia. 'Anyway we want  to see him and  we "
     In truth Faramir did not  go  by  his own choosing. But the Lord of the 
"long from the night-eyed orcs. But desperate as that road might be, his task  "
"felt his weariness little, so eagerly did he listen to all that was said. "
"Lemmy Caddan,4264096079205,07-07-1999
"
     In fact with every step towards the gates of Mordor Frodo felt the Ring 
"hobbits crept inside, and sat there upon a floor  of old leaves and  decayed "
####-night and  the errand-riders; and  Gandalf said that it was a sign that  war 
"guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before  all  was won the Battle "
some errand  of  mischief. But  that  does  not matter  much now. His  worst  
"     'Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps. how strong "
"     'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur, "
"####-Sam, the Chief's Men. He sends them round everywhere, and if any of us small "
""
"hole,  and  then  coiling  his  length  together,  roaring  like  thunder  underground,  he "
"Larissa Garmons,4017951013408,14-06-1989
"
and they saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Orcs; 
Sitting round the fire they told him in turn all that they could remember of 
"this is still the same that walked the woods and  hills long  ago, and  even "
"""That  does  not  prove  it,""  said Balin,  ""though  I  don't  doubt  you  are  right. But "
""
"they  stopped  short, as  if  they  had been  struck stiff. 'Now,  my little "
"always more about you than anyone expects!"" It was Gandalf. "
His splendour is humbled! 
"foiled  in Bree  and  at Crickhollow, they  returned to their  Captain  with "
"their travels now and again. Not that many ever came back,  and not that all "
     The drums rolled and rattled. With a vast rush Grond was hurled forward 
"     'It may be all we could wish,' said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shire "
weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue. 
wide 
"Pincas Franz,4041375743127,13-07-1976
"
"     'What do you fear, lady?' he asked. "
bad ends; and most of the passes were infested by evil things and dreadful dangers. 
"path for you,' said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone "
"keeping the only  treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to give me, even "
shot wider.  For you must know that much is still preserved  of ancient lore 
"away  through  the  trees.  They  followed  the  tracks  up  the  hill,  until  hidden  by "
"Still  goblins  go  faster  than  dwarves,  and  these  goblins  knew  the  way  better "
and Legolas gazed at them in wonder. 
' 
"""Hear, hear!"" said Bilbo, and accidentally said  it aloud, ""Hear what?""  they all "
round eyes. He had never seen a thing that looked so big before. 
"the Riders, walking and leading their horses, to find paths over the thickly "
"staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches and of  other passages and "
     The woman turned  and went slowly into  the house. As  she  passed  the  
     'See now!' said Gandalf. 'The Westfold dales  are  opening  before  us.  
suspicion was in his heart that no sword had any more terror for him. 
"     'I  suppose  you're  right,  Mr.  Frodo,'  said  Sam.  'I've heard some "
terrible old  men.  Still the Lord of Gondor  learned more from you than you  
true in places.' 
"well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me  all, no "
"were  flawless and smooth,  and the light  of stars was in  her bright eyes,  "
"     Again Gandalf approached the  wall, and lifting up his arms he spoke in "
glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down. 
they had passed some way down the winding road.  Sunlight was  still shining 
"####-     `Well, sir,  there is a  Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got "
"     Many loud yells  in orc-speech  answered him, and the ringing  clash of "
been through some stiff times. We want to go on.' 
"and the old road goes up and up, until it reaches  a dark  pass at  the top, "
"was shaped  in  the making of  the mountains, but  mighty works  the  Men of "
"     'If we could cross the Great River, we might,' said another voice. 'But "
in our  time. Had he been  among us to  consult concerning the hard words of 
"yerself, if yer say any more."" "
Sam who had  a scratch along the scalp.  A  quick duck had saved him; and he 
"was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What  is more, he "
"Sib Axston,4622977996161,13-09-1988
"
'Doesn't know what's good for him. Ai! We shall have some fun later.' 
away  down  the  passages  taking  the  torch-light  with  them  and  leaving  everything 
"####-Dimrill  Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay upon it, "
third hour has rung. 
"Theressa Lee,4017955951142817,15-01-1978
"
"along while he was wondering in the hall. He had hardly turned the knob, be-x)re "
"wondered why the man was  so suspicious, and whether any one had been "
and up the stair beyond the door! ' 
"     'The enemy,' men  murmured. 'The  dike is  down. Here they come pouring "
"find someone more easy-tempered? Hadn't you better explain it all a bit clearer?""-"
"rumour  of  his  flight,  and  they  crouched  against  the  walls  of  the  grassy  terrace "
"""Come, come!"" he  said.  ""While  there's  life  there's hope!"" as my  father used  to "
"that  can't  get  away,  but must  go  on miserably  burgling  the  same  house  day  after "
was dappled with the fitful moonlight. 
"     'Then, Jowyn  of Rohan, I say to  you  that you  are  beautiful. In the "
voices of birds in  the sky. He  felt the sun upon his face  and hands  when 
"     'Well,' answered Merry slowly. 'He is dead. It  has brought it all back  "
Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see!  you  dream no longer. 
"huge  arm and shoulder, with  a  dark skin of  greenish scales,  was  thrust  "
"stage, when it first  begins  to grip. But  as  far as I know Bilbo alone in "
"     'We shall see,'  answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do "
"relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of old "
"the River on some perilous errand, and he may have sent tidings.  "
"not ask  me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time "
"used  in the Shire.  There were several Underhills  from Saddle, and as they "
with  the D®nedain and the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand foot 
"Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond "
"Giralda Maruszewski,4041594162371418,25-02-1985
"
"Silverlode,  the Elves untied the ropes and  coiled two of them.  R®mil, who "
"Kendell Bemment,4761694813304285,19-01-1984
"
 
little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! ' Faramir  took a small  nail-knife 
"passed  at length up the  Snowbourn, seeking strong places of refuge in time "
     'Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?' said Aragorn. 
sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and 
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of  
"the  days of  the youth  of Denethor: not to dwell in,  but  to  hold as  an "
"     Frodo and Sam got up, rubbing their eyes, like children wakened from an "
"Cirith  Ungol  I  will  not speak  tonight.  Treachery,  treachery  I  fear; "
"Jehanna Reeders,4286068596640734,29-04-1992
"
"Evelina Bambrough,4241807238411,19-05-1987
"
####-eaten today?' 
Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for many 
that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?' 
     and see the open sun go past: 
"fern and grass,  deep and soft  and  strangely fragrant. The sun was shining "
like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast. 
"and beyond.' To this Gimli agreed, though with no great delight, it seemed. "
"all too likely that some will say at this point: ""Shut the book now, dad; we "
"Bilbo kneeling on the brink and peering forward cried: ""There is a boat against "
"affairs  of Wizards,' said Pippin.  'I  should like a bit  of information as "
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven: 
"     'That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listening "
""
but we don't wish to hurt you.' 
the 
"citadel the standard of  the Stewards,  bright argent like snow  in the sun, "
"change  in him, but  just what kind of a change  and  how deep, I'm not sure "
"they  did  not see  the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy with fog, "
do?' 
"ago.  This,  Thorin,  the  runes  name  Orcrist,  the  Goblin-cleaver  in  the  ancient "
"     Suddenly from the Dike yells  and screams,  and the fierce battle-cries "
not fall!' 
"     `Maybe,' he said. `But so great a claim will need to be established and "
Gandalf. 'Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:  
"close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; so he crawled "
"Rahel Caesar,4041374525058089,22-04-1994
"
"and  I  think  I would  choose  this,  if  they  took  all  the  rest!"" All  the same he had an "
"the Gate. Let us follow it!"" "
those that crawled up. He had taken off his ring when he rescued Fili and forgotten 
"Agace Darch,4041375987032249,18-07-1996
"
the  greensward of  the  Houses of Healing behind them; and  away  southward 
wound was not deep or vital. How then do you read the matter?' 
"though his garments were rich,  and his cloak was lined with  fur, they were "
     At  last  Aragorn stirred.  'Gandalf!'  he said.  'Beyond all hope  you  
"cloak as he swung up, and nearly got him. In a minute there was a whole pack of "
disconcerting. 
"wild. 'The  pass! Run, run, and we'll be  through-through before any one can "
between them our enemies have contrived only to  bring Merry and Pippin with 
"endless dark days. ""That's what we wants now, yes; we wants it!"" "
"had left  the hills,  and made a noise like a rushing wind. The Moon did not "
"none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast. "
"With  that  the hobbit  turned and  scuttled  inside his  round green door, and  shut "
five  years before the tale was brought to its present end;  in that  time I 
"     'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas. "
"####-years ago, when I last saw you, I still knew little for certain.' "
rose-brambles;  iris-swords stood in  ranks about it. and water -lily  leaves 
to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and 
""
     'Foiled again!' he said  to his  wife. 'And after waiting sixty   years.  
"     They remained some  days in Lothlurien, so  far as they could  tell  or "
power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not. 
"     The black crawling shape was now three-quarters  of  the way down,  and "
with  gems  and  fragments  of  gold  from  his  long  lying  on  his  costly  bed.  Behind 
""
"laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. 'Sting I gave to you Sam,' he said. "
""
"you wish to  go, except to servants  of the Enemy. And one   day I may reward "
seen before. For a  while they felt faintly the sense of stifling which they 
"surface of  the  lake, and down  the wind came  the voices of  the people of Esgaroth "
"himself up  to the point,  sudden. He made up his mind  at last to go. Where "
"said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas. 'That was a mighty shot in  the "
had caught the muttered words.  
song as they marched.' 
said;  but it was not until Frodo approached the  usually more  sober age of 
"     And  with  that  he staggered  to  his feet and was Samwise the hobbit, "
     East rode the  knights of  Dol Amroth driving the  enemy  before  them: 
"     'Behold! I  go forth, and  it  seems like to be  my last riding,'  said "
"     But Aragorn said:  'Nay, lady, be  not troubled  for  us! If we may lie "
"up,' said Gandalf. 'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.' "
"     As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists  lifted, "
"fell. `I  am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. You  "
"Wormtongue,' said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him. 'He is bold "
those  who  like allegory  or  topical reference.  But I  cordially  dislike 
ruined my taters!' 
 
rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill running 
"indeed  come among  them, and after war he brought healing; and the news ran "
"understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot, "
"craft, unless in some great need.' "
"     'At his command they fell back. ""Even the shades of Men are obedient to "
"     'I do,' said Pippin. 'Though you are  not far  wrong. I am still little "
stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty hall; its black  
"any rate it  gave him no inspiration. He spoke  'a  few suitable  words', as "
"Stone,  but  they slept little, because  of the dread  of  the Shadows  that "
"leave his deep pool again. So  now, when its master was awake  once more and "
"####-dark, with scarcely a snore more than a whiff of unseen steam, when Bilbo peeped "
"Company had  brought. Legolas  was away much among the Galadhrim,  and "
"and the beginnings of the City,  read on! "" he said.  ""For to me what was is "
"you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet  "
"Warden Howen,4017953393440311,03-06-1980
"
shook his head  and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much 
"snake, boring its way across the  sheer slope of rock.  Steep as a stair, it "
""
"and had long prepared against our stroke, governing Mordor from afar through "
crawling over the fields.  
when Sam stood upon  Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern 
"     The companions  sat on the ground at his  feet, and Aragorn took up the "
A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do 
came curling down again. 
"     'Yes,  this is Mordor,' said Frodo. 'Just one of its works. Saruman was "
fissures  and  long  slanting edges that were in places  almost as  wide  as 
is greatly increased;  they will take  the  shortest way that they  can find 
came straight up to him. 
"unexpectedly  after  dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise.  He "
     Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While 
windows save moonlight  and  starlight  and  the wind off  the  hill-top.' A 
"     Orcs, and talking  trees, and leagues of  grass,  and galloping riders. "
the coomb. seeking to escape.  Upon the  east  too sheer and stony  was  the 
forward through the dark. 
"Raye Benjefield,4041592909303,03-09-1995
"
snoring changed its note. 
"for  such  things:  there were no things of gold or silver in his hall, and few save the "
different jar. The taste was not the same  as it  had been the night before: 
     Faramir heard and answered. `Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes 
"blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white flame above them; beyond there "
sooner: what  he  wanted.  From the  moment he  first  saw it he  wanted the 
"     'But  it is not your own Shire,' said Gildor. 'Others dwelt here before "
"gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it  before. Suddenly "
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all  the Shire discussing my  
"""Well, I should say that you ought to go East and have a look round. After all "
with all that on his back. 
been one of Thorin's companions on the day the Dragon came. 
"gone  mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo.  Folk  are queer  up "
"signal.  His fear  of  the orcs,  forgot ten  for  a  while  in his wrath and "
"Melosa Cluitt,4017952993780,24-10-1991
"
"custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and "
####- 
"Baily MacCallester,4041370321239303,10-06-1975
"
"trick of Saruman's, to waylay  the king  while he  had  only a few men about "
     The ridge upon  which the companions  stood  went down  steeply  before 
"Linn Stean,4041371686972074,29-08-1997
"
"the Horse-country.  No, we must  stick together.  These lands are dangerous:  "
"Merola Everist,4958193944019386,17-11-1983
"
"Gustaf Wrettum,4041591482817435,11-01-2001
"
looking  into a pool of ink. He  got down and closed the shutter and went to 
For the first time for many a day Bilbo was really delighted. But there was no 
""
but not all. Even in  the Shire there are some as like  minding other folk's 
"     Saruman's face  grew  livid, twisted  with rage,  and a  red light  was "
 
"and  thriven  in  the Wild, since  the dragons had driven men from the lands, and the "
"the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.' "
"left the town so soon, while some were still willing to defend it. "
"looked,  its  sprawling  branches  going  up like  reaching  arms with  many "
"     O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after! "
out  the  land  to  the  South  where  the  Front  Gate  stood.  For  this  purpose  he  chose 
"     `Not  that way! No, not that  way! '  whispered  Gollum, but the breath "
     'Indeed!'  said Ugl®k.  'Waste  of  effort.  I'll see that  orders  are 
Riders  or other  servants of the  Enemy. Even from the Eagles of the  Misty 
policies will not avail us  at all. There is no hope left in Elves  or dying 
not  listen to my warnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose 
"before him on  his  horse  he bore  the body of his kinsman, Faramir  son of "
it seemed  to the watchers that  firmness  and strength returned to his thin 
"son of Gblmud. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and "
"fine, though  it  was  growing hazy,  and it was  hot for March, even so far "
on 
"pardon, "
"competition, and shuddered most appreciatively at his description of Gollum. "
Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have an enemy behind as well 
     'Untie our legs!' said Merry. 
don't think I should have had the heart to leave it.' 
creeping down the path out  of the gloom ahead. Sam sat  propped against the 
"darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo "
     At that moment there  came a roaring and  a rushing: a  noise  of  loud 
"Evey Munsey,4041378792821202,08-05-1999
"
"sake, as  well  as  for others, you  will have to go, and leave the  name of "
"the ominous mountains had already drawn. The air was now clearer and colder, "
"himself. And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like Lotho.' "
"Adda Elgram,4041591366091,24-08-1985
"
warn you  that you will be in  danger  as long as I  am in your house. These 
out into the darkness. As he  passed the ponies one of them let fly with his 
"the right one. Tell me what you want done, and I will try it, if I have to walk from "
"     And so Gollum found  them hours later, when  he returned,  crawling and  "
"and though still far off, the walls of Mordor were no longer a cloudy menace "
"Tell Bob! Ah, but there I'm forgetting, Bob's gone: goes home to his folk at "
speak 
"Lowrance MacClinton,4041371592890,16-05-1977
"
"Willdon Bromehead,4041370990186,02-06-1991
"
and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words. At length Celeborn 
"flowed  swirling  in  a  narrow  channel,  carved  and  made  straight  and  deep  by  the "
mention it: How Samwise  fell  in  the High Pass and made  a wall of  bodies 
"Bobby Heelis,4041378625545,14-07-1999
"
"beating in the hills, though no living thing could be seen. Then Aragorn let "
"a sign. There  is little  shelter or defence here,  but fire shall serve for  "
"spires  of  smoke and  spouting  steams  went  billowing  up, up, until they "
quietly. 
receive you. Will you not consult with me? Will you not come up?' 
troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought  that he would so soon have 
"the world moves, and it  moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because "
"and you promised. So come along! Come and let me out, and then go on with your "
now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.' 
skill with horses than some.' 
"""O yes! lots of them; but I dodged 'em. I got stuck in the door, which was only "
dared  to  dwell  here  under  the  shadow  of  the  distant  dragon-mountain. They  still 
"journey from Hobbiton to the Ford  of Bruinen was questioned and considered, "
western sky with glimmering  gold. Before them stretched a dark still  lake. 
     For  a  moment  Frodo  stood gaping. Then  in  desperation he  began  a  
"     They woke  up, all four  at  once, in the morning light. Tom was moving "
and  chill. Their ponies  were standing  crowded together  with their  heads 
great violence  of  Sauron in  the torment  of Gorgoroth  beyond.  Still far 
"laboured  in sleepless pain for many nights.  'Nay, my  friends,  I  and the "
were also asked; and there were even  a few from outside the  borders. Bilbo  
"Emanuel Schanke,4536843650721,13-10-1982
"
almost turned and dashed back. His pony reared and neighed. 
"miserable,  and  he  could  not  see  anything  in  the  gloom  below  when  he  got  there. "
you know it?' 
sun; and though the Ringwraiths did not  yet stoop low upon  their foes  and  
"     The world was fair, the mountains tall, "
"time to Elrond's house, or wherever you wish to go. "
"fallen,  and the flakes were  becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly  a  dim "
Here we come back to the eastward  road. The dark shadow yonder is the 
"     The  day  after, being the  third day  since they  set  out  from Minas "
     'What is the time?' said Pippin yawning. 
"He resisted the  temptation firmly, and clasped  the Ring in his hand, as if "
lights go out! And now indeed light alone can help us.' 
might now have learned to our destruction?' 
"round  them,  though  the  creatures,  whatever  they  were,  were  careful  never  to  let "
"Elrond.  `The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But "
"where the worst  trouble  has been. He was wounded by the Orcs,  and many of "
     The rocks and stones 
has gone with Elrond's  sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for  
"hair  and stood him  on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Ugl®k dragged him up "
     While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon: 
there! They are coming!' 
####-cavernous streets under the earth with  arches  carved  like trees;  and the 
"     'Come dear  folk!' she said,  taking Frodo by the hand.  'Laugh  and be  "
passed  out of the Hall of Fire.  Even as they  stepped over the threshold a  
"His foe is dead, the Worm of Dread, "
queenly indeed as  she stood there at  his  side. The mantle was wrought for  
He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words. 'I am afraid I am 
"Things  were  looking  pretty  bad  again,  when  suddenly  Bilbo  appeared  and "
"     Green and long  grew the grass  on  Snowmane's Howe, but ever black and "
"hills my paths led. And through the air, I am he that walks unseen."" "
"bring the guilty to judgement,' said Thjoden, and his voice was grim, yet he "
"Baird Sicily,4041596424267,22-08-1981
"
"     After going  a  dozen yards he  halted,  peering and listening. Nothing "
"""I  immediately had  a  feeling  that  I was wanted back. Looking behind  I  saw  a "
Wargs  and  the  goblins  often  helped  one  another  in wicked  deeds. Goblins  do  not 
"Lonna Radage,4305439393372747,18-04-1976
"
"""Does  it  guess  easy?  It  must  have  a  competition  with  us,  my  preciouss!  If "
     Sam drew a  deep breath. 'An Oliphaunt it  was!' he said. `S o there are 
that gave the wound. Few now have the  skill in  healing to match  such evil  
"questions. He had enjoyed the  joke,  of course, even  though he had been in "
"rolling  Boom that seemed  to come  from depths far below, and to tremble in "
of Ugl®k's faults.' 
"The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills "
"     'And this I remember of Boromir as a boy,  when we together learned the "
Master.' 
Poor  Mr.  Baggins  –  it  was  a  weary  long  time  that  he  lived  in  that  place  all 
"""Ss, ss, ss,"" said Gollum. He had been underground a long long time, and was "
will.' 
"####-the bones  and the empty garments, we  shall find it, we  shall  get it, the "
"fluttering  leaves,  Frodo and  Sam sat under the whispering  trees amid the "
the king command?' 
     As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out  brightly he 
     To  the hobbits as  they  looked  out it seemed that all their  journey 
"Bilbo felt so hungry that he would have eaten acorns, if any had been ripe enough "
"the phial of Galadriel, but it  was pale and cold in  his trembling hand and "
but they were now further from the hills. 
"heavier, the beginnings of a plan had come into his little head. "
"     `To be very very good,' said Gollum.  Then crawling to Frodo's  feet he "
"troubled  the  world,  especially  the  ingenious  devices  for  killing  large  numbers  of "
"scurrying  round  the corner  in  full cry, and  found Goblin-cleaver and Foe-hammer "
"Ailyn O'Noulane,4726948828666,06-03-1988
"
Treebeard striding down the path to greet them with Quickbeam at his side. 
short.  He stumbled forward  with all the speed he could towards  the cries;  
long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar. ' 
shaped in  the likeness of a ravening wolf; on it spells of  ruin lay. Grond 
"     `That's about it,'  said Sam. `And  we'd better be a  bit more watchful "
"said  Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. `It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I "
"Over rapid, over sand, "
Butterbur. 'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me  can do 
"finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the  window he "
silence fell.  The hobbits  thought  of  the  soft light of sunset  glancing 
"`And what shall we do, if you prove right? ' "
"     `No, no,  master! ' wailed  Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great "
"hatred, piercing the heart with a poisonous despair . "
"a  foul fungus-growth, all about the beleaguered  city great camps of tents, "
     where twilight lies upon the knees 
"different from what I expected - so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it "
     'Stand still! ' he whispered to the others. `Do not move or speak! ' 
"     'Mr. Frodo, sir!' cried Sam quaking. 'Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't  "
"and  broil them,  if you like.  I am  sorry there  is no  green  stuff:  the "
Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; 
"watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered  out. With his "
"ought to  be comfortable here. I  am leaving everything  to him,  of course, "
But that won't  stop us  living  in this fat  little country  where you have 
now.' 
"approved. The  most critical  reader of all, myself, now finds many defects,  "
"of that kind rightly requires time,  and even then the door can be broken by "
alas! For the  Orcs were greater in number than we counted on. Others joined 
Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they were to lie and rest  
"     'It was a compliment,' said Merry  Brandybuck, 'and so, of  course, not "
"feel we ought to be going soon. I'm worried about my gaffer, to tell you the "
again. 
"the  outlet of Shelob's tunnel, where the rags  of  her great web were still "
"""Well,  hurry  up!""  said  Bilbo,  relieved  to  think  of  Gollum  going  away.  He "
was growing old. 
"Alikee Cubin,4017957932205,29-03-1978
"
"""No sign was  there of post or  lintel or  threshold, nor any sign of bar or bolt or "
     While Gollum was  away Sam took  another look  at Frodo.  He  was still 
"light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch "
"counsellor.  You may  learn something, a nd  whether what you  see be fair or "
"Kathryne Bernli,4017952126636450,26-12-1976
"
heavy shining thing  came hurtling down from  above. It glanced off the iron  
"are  fourteen  of  us.""  Others  said:  ""Where  has  Gandalf  got  to?""  This  remark  was "
"     Oliphaunt am I, "
"Giffy Feldhammer,4041378780050103,27-10-1995
"
have  found nothing. I cannot  think  why  they have gone and do  not attack  
"     The rain,  however, did  not  last  long.  Slowly  the  sky above  grew "
and 
"Carlie Kloska,4041372511625622,01-09-1986
"
of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two tiny gleams 
     'Now! ' shouted Gandalf. 'Now is the last chance. Run for it! ' 
"star-glimmer they must have offered  their cunning foes some mark, unless it "
behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We  are coming to the end of the 
"Saree Theobold,4017957100061583,29-09-1997
"
"Franni Channing,4291601347587,20-10-1989
"
There is no hope of escape that way.' 
"honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?' "
"their heads (which was alarming). The nights were comfortless and chill, and they "
"     'Alas! yes,' said Frodo. `I saw him fall into the abyss.' "
"spoke  fragments of broken  spells of opening, and nothing  stirred. At  last  tired out "
sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff. 
to Pippin. 
"Barn Whild,4041593894504122,01-06-1995
"
"""But  without  a  feast  we  shan't  remain  alive  much  longer  anyway,""  said "
"Judie Marlin,4778626470811880,07-07-1991
"
"come on you in the wild, in some dark  place where  there is no help. Do you "
some  time the hobbits could not  hear  or feel what was troubling him. Then 
     Though they rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening and all 
Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that  puts it back a bit. But that 
"the  rowan, and the linden.  But when the Ents all gather ed round Treebeard, "
"kingdoms last, you mean; but they will have to last long indeed to seem long  "
"other things.  And yet again  Ents are more like Men,  more  changeable than "
"     Away  high  in the East swung Remmirath,  the Netted Stars,  and slowly "
"     When wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain  "
"bore their thoughts  still on, beyond dark  mountains to the Land of Shadow.  "
legends and family histories take it for granted; for ages folk in the Shire 
"but was an air wholly fresh  and  clean  and young, as if it had not  before "
"     I will not say the Day is done, "
and  the  finding  of  the  ring  interested  them  so  much  that  for  a  while  they  forgot 
"great  fume that, beaten  upwards by  the  opposing airs, mounted higher and  "
"that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon  caught  them,  but steadily "
haste. Will you not go or send to say  that  we  are come?' His eyes glinted 
"     `Ah  well,  sir,' said Sam, `you said  my master had an elvish air  and "
"the  world  was young, and the woods were  wide  and wild,  the Ents and the "
"     While  they  were halted,  the wind died  down, and the snow  slackened "
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in 
Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.' 
"     All  of them, it seemed, had fared  alike:  each  had felt that  he was "
"cake  in  front  of  them, when  loud  came  a  ring  at  the  bell  again,  and  then  another "
"####-arms and  legs as he danced on  the  spider-string under his armpits, just like one of "
beyond them. 
     The  star  shone  out briefly  and faded again.  Then silently  a great 
wearisome  task  in  turns  of  four  each while  the  others  shared  their  packs.  If  these 
But it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less 
"####-him, and  over all  hung a  clear blue sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. "
"up the faces of the rocks and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff, "
"Kathie Pallister,4017950564676863,29-12-1995
"
"Windham Blackhall,4041594247389,23-01-1986
"
the fires huge towers and engines. Yet their Captain cared not  greatly what 
     unheralded he homeward sped. 
""
"     'Let  me see  now:  if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that "
"woods,  but  these  were  not  purple  at  all,  they  were  a  dark  dark  velvety  black "
left hand; on the other side the ground sloped away and there were dells below the 
"     As they spoke  thus, the  Company filed slowly along the  paths  in the "
"     He had passed  beyond  the torchlight, almost to a great arched door at "
"not of beast-shape. It  had eluded  capture, and  they had not  shot it, not "
Lake 
"     They walked  down  a paved passage, long and  empty, and  as  they went "
beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all 
"the lawns and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlurien. There "
tired  of  the  game.  It  had made  him  very  hungry  indeed.  This  time  he  did  not  go 
Now  strange  to  say  Mr.  Baggins  had  more  than  the  others.  He  would  often 
"up in the mountains at all, and where you were coming from, and where you were "
and turned him toward the South. `Look this way first! ' he said. 
wouldn't be much use.' 
"if they are wise, why  should they expect  to know it,  until  the hour  has "
"Vanna Gregersen,4178724112149,10-05-1990
"
"Micky Sherlaw,4041377528435,20-11-1985
"
Not  far  from  the mouth  of  the Forest River was the strange town he heard the 
longer felt limp like a helpless prey. 
"with  white  gems in their hair; and last came Master  Elrond, mighty  among "
"Then with  a  dart he  sprang to  the sill,  and thrust a  long arm out  and "
"     'All aboard, Sam?' said Frodo. "
"seldom allowed inside. Bilbo  was  busy:  writing invitations,  ticking  off "
"ancient days  they had had wars with some of  the dwarves, whom  they accused of "
     'Stew the rabbits!'  squealed Gollum in  dismay. `Spoil  beautiful meat 
these hills?' 
to -- sss  -- those places.' 
"Middle-earth, nor  until the lands  that lie  under the wave  are lifted  up "
""
"will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will be.' "
"their way with  it, and it had vanished, broken and buried under  the leaves "
"     Now far ahead the Road has gone, "
"####-them.  They stood  silent,  reluctant to make  the final  parting, and  only "
"just  now, foolishly.  Give it back  to  Smjagol you  said. Do  not say that "
"upon our world,  and when it comes I hope to  face it steadily; but it would "
vanished into the night. 
"became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent  on the edge of  the "
     The night was  cold  and still. All round the knoll  on which  the  Orcs 
"with their mail-shirts so bright and their shields so splendid, laughing and "
half-eaten fish  in  his  mouth  and another  in his hand. He came  close to 
"what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.' "
"also  in many places holes and pitfalls, and dark wells beside  the  path in "
"far end of the basin,  just out of the deep shadow of the rocks. There was a  "
"of starvation in the Waste, deserted by his companions. "
of memory. Or  perhaps he  had been ill? But  the ceiling looked strange; it 
####-asleep. For at the beginning Faramir spoke only of the errand  upon which he 
     O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter! 
"Cthrine Tourner,4041374337517,25-08-1994
"
Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed 
"darkly  at the wood,  and  passed their  hands  over their brows, as if they "
"Frodo,  and he  cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as "
"Myles Ocklin,4017957517816,17-01-1983
"
Window-curtain into  a deep  bowl  filled  with knives of  stone. Now rest a  
"their eyes when Glorfindel, who  had set himself to watch  while they slept, "
somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind?  I'm sure to go wrong. 
staring moment the watchers  on the walls saw all the space between them and 
"     'Open, in the name of Mordor!' said a voice thin and menacing. "
     But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen  mood. He had  all 
of  Beleriand where it was forged.  But you must be the  guard and hold back 
"Ewell Hillock,4548945685315,11-05-1977
"
"course,  he  gets  most  of  the  credit  for  the  present  prosperity.  They  are  making "
"####-back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of "
"Help yourself again, there is plenty and to spare!"" "
"     'I thought you liked walking in the dark,' said Frodo. 'But there is no "
the Dwarf. 
of  Elendil would be a help beyond  our hope-if  such a  thing could  indeed 
up into the sky. Gold was piled on the  biers of dead kings and queens;  and 
the measurement of your land I do not know. Anyhow we are near the roots  of 
"Papageno Lineham,4041379152531,14-07-1990
"
"passages  and stairs they felt the cool morning air, fresh and sweet,  about "
"seemed wise and  reasonable, and desire awoke in them  by swift agreement to "
"great gift that cannot be forgotten, though our  ways have parted since. And "
struck did  not break.  It gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked 
"never return and  had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as "
"     'We know it  well,' said Aragorn, 'and never  shall it be forgotten  in "
"something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.' "
"back, if there is one, goes past the Mountain.' "
"Gertruda Methingam,4381481883437,23-01-1991
"
This time there looked like being a horrible battle. 
"     The others looked  dismayed;  only  Aragorn,  who  knew  Gandalf  well, "
you smell it?' He sniffed at the wind. 
     'I would gladly learn how this creeping Smjagol became possessed of the 
to run. 
"cloud again.  'Yes, you may  still call me Gandalf,'  he said, and the voice "
"Suddenly  one  of  the  goblins  inside  shouted:  ""There  is  a  shadow  by  the  door. "
"of me at our parting? For  darkness will flow between us, and it may be that "
"And through the merry flowers of June, "
"leapt  down  to  the  falls'  foot,  and  rushed  forward  to  battle. Wolf  and  rider  fell  or "
unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon its  chain  about his neck grew 
"Michale Raspison,4017958897159,14-02-1975
"
"Gandalf. ""But things may change yet."" "
"that by some trick of the tunnel, or of the hearing which the Ring gave him, "
sword he stood by the king's stirrup. Jomer and his esquire rode back to the 
had run off into the Blue. There he had  undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a  
""
"     'That  Gollum's  about   again,  I'm  afraid,  Mr.  Frodo,'   he  said. "
"doors. Slowly  he  groped his  way back in  the dark along  the  tunnel, not "
     As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed  slowly down 
"Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over. "
"and  this  is  how  it  happened.  One  day,  nosing  and  wandering  about.  Bilbo "
"""But I squeezed through all right-and here I am."" "
     Over  the city of Gondor doubt and  great  dread had hung. Fair weather  
But we will leave this now. Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One 
by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?' 
"     The Orcs clapped and  hooted. 'Can't take his medicine,'  they  jeered. "
"Levey Nottingam,4795805671576,11-12-1989
"
"saw it all the time, of course. And anyway I have some stuff of my own. Come "
last saw him gathering men about him and fighting  in the mouth of the Deep. 
"they  had  brought.  For  each they  had  provided a  hood  and cloak,  made "
"the Prince. Now he looked to the River,  and hope died in his heart, and the "
"the White Tower, wandering  in  a  desperate fever; dying someone  said, and "
"####-in the  Eastfarthing, descending from  those days,  when  news  from  North, "
"     For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo, on an umbrella. "
dependants 
"     The  night  grew  ever  colder.  Aragorn  and Gimli slept fitfully, and "
"with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lurien. But have they the strength, have we "
"against the sun,  and as  he  gazed he  saw white sea -birds  beating  up the "
to go  before they could reach the point on the  far shore that  Gandalf was 
""
"below  the  snows that clad the  lofty peaks, and it  looked down  over  the "
"light, borne upon a wind of war; but below the air was still and breathless,  "
"     'We do  not shape stone with battle-axes,  nor with our  finger -nails,' "
"     'In an envelope, if you must know,'  said Bilbo impatiently. 'There  on "
"had axes in their hands, and barred the way. "
storm moving out of the East. And   away in the North-west there seemed to be 
""
"     They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faint "
short  two-pronged  fork and  some skewers were  stowed;  and hidden  at the 
     There was some discussion of the name that the new row should be given. 
"the land.  Nevertheless its folk are seldom  seen, and maybe they  dwell now  "
light they beheld the peril of the gates.  
"reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the "
"you were brought out of the fire to the King. He has  tended you, and now he "
"many  skilled  elves;  and  they  busied  themselves  felling  trees,  and  collecting  the "
"Ede MacKeig,4414448120188506,03-09-1993
"
now high noon.  The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow of the trees.  
 
cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a  
and  the  goblins  must  have  opened  their  new  entrance  at  the  top  of  the  pass  the 
"Concettina Ludwig,4318483769453,18-11-1975
"
way further  on into the  wood: shafts  of sunlight seemed  suddenly to have  
he stooped and bent low with his face almost in the grass. Then he called to 
"     'There was a lot more,' said Sam,  'all about  Mordor.  I  didn't learn "
endless time. 
"don't go  on, master. Don't go down to that den! Now's our only chance.  Now "
drew 
"Burglar he is, or will be when the time comes. There is a lot more in him than you "
"followed, one hour  or many, Gimli remembered little. The others pressed on, "
"his hands that still clasped his master's. Then  he knew what had  happened,  "
knowing a bit about rope -making: it's in the family as you might say.' 
very  hour  of  his  great  designs the  heir of  Isildur and the  Sword are 
"Almeda Yushachkov,4855278481551885,21-05-1975
"
"any  rate, I know  more than hobbits  do themselves. And even  Bilbo's story "
     `Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? ' asked Frodo. 'For  
and was never heard of again. 
""
"some basis in experience,  though  slender (for the  economic situation  was "
"uproar of last night. Shut the door before it is too late!"" "
"dear  fellow,""  said  he,  ""whenever  are  you  going  to  come?  What  about  an  early "
"the  Forest,  which could now be seen rising pale and green out of  the dark "
"care, and went to their rest. "
"mirage of cool green. 'Yes, even here I could sleep.' "
"     `It is as  I feared,'  said Gandalf.  `These  were no  ordinary  wolves "
looks like you.' 
So several of the dwarves got up and groped back to where the door had been. 
"Tynan Morse,4498162887659315,28-06-1997
"
"was master, then we could help ourselfs, yes, and still keep promises.' "
bread-crust. It was like watching the work of  great tree-roots in a hundred 
     Faramir smiled grimly. `Then you would grieve to learn that  Boromir is 
"Randi Vignal,4837540301418063,08-10-1976
"
"journeying  in  your land  beyond the  Baranduin,* learned  that things were "
"ponies  and  donkeys  (and  other much more  dreadful  things),  and  they are always "
their journeys and adventures. At first he pretended to take some notes; but 
"in his forehead gave him  no  more trouble, but he bore a  brown scar to the "
"     Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling "
"all. It was very  unlike Bilbo to do  so,  anyway; and I thought  it  rather  "
"their  line  of march, and could only be crossed  by scrambling down and out "
"something,' said Merry. 'It  is a long way to  run; but  run  I shall, if  I "
"while you may, and let me go where my doom takes me.' "
of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But  in  front a thin 
'and  many more things than  I can tell are remembered in  Rivendell.'  'Have  
contested the fords with fell folk  of Umbar and Harad who had sailed up the 
""
"keep it. Therein  lies all our hope. This, then, is my  counsel. We have not "
"were on the right, where the Firienfeld was wider; and on the left there was "
on roads that I will not tell. 
"     Gandalf  laughed. 'Well,  well,'  he  said, 'if they are afraid of just "
distant glow.  
 
"     'When have I been hasty or unwary, who have  waited and prepared for so "
"through  the  Gap  into  the  waste  lands  beyond,  and  then  they  turned "
"     'When Treebeard had got a few  arrows  in  him, he began to warm up, to  "
now brooded as at the coming of a  great storm: for the Captains of the West  
"the  look  of  the  Mountain,  nor  the  thought  of  the  dragon,  and  he  had  besides  a "
"to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then up into the roof of dark "
"     Neither Hirluin the Fair to the hills by the sea, "
it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to move his hand. 
"sense in it. They cut down trees and let 'em lie, they burn houses and build "
"yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of Orc, I guess, or a  "
 
"Hatty O'Dowd,4041597583576804,06-06-1989
"
rest.' 
"that direction, at any rate while darkness lasted. "
"your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil,  nor call it a vain pursuit. You  "
"likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.' "
"     Sand and stone and pool and dell, "
 
"behind, where they had met again, seemed almost homely: they were out in the "
"and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy "
"     Saruman paused. 'Unsay?' he mused, as if puzzled. 'Unsay? I endeavoured "
bolt. But he's still too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us 
soon ceased altogether.  
voice whispering and  urging them. But none  were unmoved; none rejected its 
"upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good  "
"Claus Antonescu,4017952409779,16-07-1990
"
"Sib Beeho,4017953011285,23-12-1977
"
would  have destroyed them.  But when dark  things come  from the  houseless 
""
     They rose and looked about  them. Northward the dale ran up into a glen  
"compared  with  it.  The  sparks  were  burning  holes  in  the  goblins,  and  the  smoke "
"the  black Dwimorberg,  the Haunted Mountain, in which was  the Gate of  the "
Dump the crocks in a boiling bawl; 
"southward, higher and higher into the  dim folds about the  mountains' feet. "
"     'Thirteen, thirteen days,' faltered Pippin. 'Yes, I think that would be "
"     ` ""Yes, I have come,"" I said. ""I have  come  for your  aid, Saruman the "
ago.' 
"moment he was troubled, sensing some other power within his valley. This way "
time of our longfathers of old.' 
"dropped glowing flowers down upon the  astonished hobbits, disappearing with "
"     'I  don't  know quite where  we are,'  said  Merry;  'but that peak  is "
"     And lost he wandered under leaves, "
"Brucie Surmeyers,4041590357303828,02-01-1982
"
packs  on  their  backs  in  addition  to  their  weapons.  They  would  stand  a  siege  for 
"journey: fried not poached, and mind you don't break 'em."" "
"you to do so.  But  why should you believe  my story, if you do not trust me "
full of foul rebels and brigands.' 
the Last Homely House  in  the West and  said good-bye to Elrond. The light of the 
Ya hey! 
"the  grassy  bay  gazing  at  the  stone,  or  out  west  through  the  narrow  opening. He "
"south-east to join the  Morgul-way, and along it  many  lines of small black  "
""
"was  to  get  out  of  his  wearisome  little  stone  room,  he  wanted  to  stop  and  ask "
Suddenly it flickered back to view; a brief glow touched it and faded. 
     There was a long  silence.  Gandalf  sat down again and puffed  at  his 
"Davon Blazhevich,4017954415533224,29-11-1989
"
but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that? ' 
""
     Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men  along  the  verge of the road 
"sky. I do not  know how it will all end, and  my heart  misgives me;  for it "
declared that a Prince  of the Halflings had  come out of the North to offer  
drawing nearer. 
that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.' 
the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled. 
still speak in riddles.' 
does he so?' 
"tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he "
carved handle: it  had been shaped like  a hideous  head with squinting eyes 
"""Gollum! Well I'm blest! So that's how he sneaked past me is it? Now I know! "
     Then without taking  counsel or waiting for the approach of  the men of 
"better of it, eh?' "
"Dernhelm,  clutching  with the  left hand  while  with the other he tried to "
"morninged by Belladonna Took's son, as if I was selling buttons at the door!"" "
longer giving him all the water and most of the food.' 
""
"for this is the One, and  he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it "
flung wide. 
aware that a fury was upon her greater than any she  had known in  countless 
"     And  while Thjoden  went  by slow paths in the hills, the Grey  Company "
"number in the gathering gloom, but it  looked to him like a great army, many "
"truth out of him,  I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to "
"banners of Rohan and Dol Amroth, White Horse and Silver Swan. And about "
"""I don't know, but I expect starving in the forest."" "
     'What is it!' cried Merry. 'It is  time to get up. It is half past four 
"burning passed him, and some  seeing his livery turned  and shouted, but  he "
it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong. 
the  Lady Galadriel  approaching. Tall and white and fair she walked beneath 
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the  very 
"Alyse Lilleman,4017959089632,16-01-1977
"
"me shall  be accursed. And if my blood stains the Shire, it shall wither and "
"Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land "
"Whitaker Segeswoeth,4592098444971,01-02-1980
"
"""Thank  you!""  said  Bilbo with  a  gasp.  It was  not  the  correct  thing  to  say,  but "
tunnel  when  a  blow  smote  the  side  of  the  Mountain  like  the  crash  of  battering-
high green  wall. Passing through  an opening they came  suddenly out of the 
"""There  lies  all  that  is  left  of  Dale,""  said  Balin.  ""The  mountain's  sides  were "
"fourteen!"" "
"Monique Hamblin,4215562185314,08-09-1994
"
"directions,  till  the  air  seemed  full  of waving  snares. Bilbo,  however,  soon  slipped "
"####-     He gave  Frodo  water  and an additional wafer of the  waybread, and he "
"he  thought,  lay  his  ring.  He was hungry now,  and angry, and  once  his "
he often fell asleep; and when he  woke  he would  say:  'How splendid!  How 
####-question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?' 
"""Well,  are  you  alive  or  are  you  dead?""  asked  Bilbo  quite  crossly.  Perhaps  he "
"Tree-men, these giants, as you might call  them? They do say that one bigger "
Staddle on the  gentler  south-eastern  slopes of  the hill; down in  a deep 
"in  these  parts  and  days;  but when we  can  read  the  runes  on  them, we  shall  know "
     'You  do not understand!' said Pippin. 'You  must go  - and therefore we 
""
     'Who is  Saruman?'  asked  Pippin.  'Do  you know  anything  about  his 
     With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn. Legolas 
"coverlet. It was the right hand, and the third finger was missing. "
"being eaten, according to his dream, in the woodland feast; so they all left the path "
""
son was stricken down. Yet I would not have  you remain like a beggar at the 
"Marcella Chaffey,4017956689630107,07-11-1997
"
you could wish.' 
"escaped from Shelob's webs, and the greater now was her rage and hunger. "
"undergrowth, which somehow would not  yield to the  left, but only  gave way "
"     Frodo sat  up and yawned and  stretched.  Sam, not used to being waited "
danger or any sign of the Dragon other than the wilderness he had made about his 
 
"Bard Papez,4380417236203467,18-07-1978
"
see  in  the  blackness;  also  there  are other  things more  slimy  than  fish. Even  in  the 
     Then the Prince Imrahil and Jomer of Rohan left him and passed  through 
"hands; and he chose the greatest ship to be his own, and he went up into it. "
"Xavier Earsman,4017959126980705,16-04-1975
"
Aragorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for the Company 
"     'When  I read these words, my quest was  ended. For  the traced writing "
"in),  for  these  were  the  only  ones  to  have  windows,  deep-set  round  windows "
wrong when  he went  down  in Moria.  I  wish he hadn't. He  would have done 
""
peep at it again.' 
"ancient legend, some  dim with years,  some darkling in the shade. But  upon "
"dark  as  darkness,  except  for  two  big  round  pale  eyes  in  his  thin  face.  He  had  a "
     Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow! 
"Broddie Osborn,4041375460409,23-05-1981
"
"Merry  and Pippin  had followed, and were already disappearing westward into "
"     Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body, "
round  and  round  in  the middle of  the kitchen  trying  to  see what  they were doing. 
"Briana Avramchik,4041375696077,11-12-1982
"
"You have heard  it before, I  think. Yes, you have heard it before. But come "
device  of his  malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he 
see Merry and Pippin until they were  almost in their arms. Then they yelled 
"As  far  as  Bilbo  knew,  there  was  no  particular  reason  why  he  should  not  tell. "
with  wonder.  The  stars shone through the window and the  silence  of  the  
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.' 
####-summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens.  
"Lydie Burle,4017951600048,05-12-1985
"
""
"Mabel Kettell,4059850671537603,29-06-1978
"
 
have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting. 
"Then  the  elves  turned  towards  the  Forest,  and  Bilbo  started  on  his  long  road "
"and called to him. He turned and saw her  as a glimmer in  the night, for she "
"and clumsy-limbed, squatting cross-legged  with  their stumpy arms folded on "
Then  half turning they  thrust them  with all  their  strength towards  the 
"Emmie Jillitt,4196230856108,03-01-1978
"
"can be so, sometimes. Good night! ' "
his lordship. 
"again, every now and then sending out another horn-call,  and each time  the "
worse. I will  not deceive  you: when I heard that Shadowfax had  come  back 
For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.' 
the  black shade of a horse led by a smaller black  shadow. The black shadow 
"were  in  practice rather haywards than policemen,  more concerned  with the "
will come when I can. But I  have  an errand to the  Lord Denethor that will 
between shores of cloud.  
"     The houses  and  the  holes   of  Shire-hobbits  were  often  large, and "
"windows, and a large round door. "
"still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world  is cold until the "
Gandalf. 
"     `The  questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,' said Elrond. "
####-up; for foremost on the field rode the swan-knights of Dol Amroth with their  
"words that trailed  off into silence. 'Oh, well,' he went on, 'you have seen "
of 
"     'But even as Aragorn they  are courteous, if they break  their silence.' "
"useless. Even if you  took it and struck it  with a  heavy sledge -hammer,  it "
     'Alas! Aragorn my friend!' said Jomer. 'I had hoped that we should ride 
seen as he watched the hobbits. 
"business, whether it belongs to him or not."" "
"Jillane Leverich,4041596280016,23-02-1977
"
####-SPECIAL NOTE: 
"""Carefully!  Carefully!""  he  said.  ""It  is  not  like  you,  Bilbo,  to  keep  friends "
only to  turn  aside from the road and  leave the Quest and  the war against 
"Just  in  time Bilbo saw his peril,  and he fled blindly up the passage away "
"Burch Strauss,4017953055810025,27-03-1985
"
clad in  his old  travel -worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat  by 
"     Here Fatty Bolger halted. 'Good-bye, Frodo!' he  said.  'I wish you were "
very skilled. 
 
"wherein the stars  tremble  in the  song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who  "
"They were,  if it came to it, difficult to daunt or to kill; and they  were, "
said the wizard.  `Here you will hear many songs and  tales-if you  can keep 
Nine are abroad again. They  have  crossed the River secretly and are moving 
"pitied your sorrow. But now, were you sorrowless, without fear  or any lack, "
"before he  had a  good deal of  baggage, but he trotted along beside Sam and "
others had made before him. But now as he sat beside the  fountain in Lurien 
"Mitchel Beaney,4041594683299775,01-11-1991
"
force.' 
yellow  brass  knob  in  the  exact middle. The  door  opened  on  to  a  tube-shaped hall 
"thrice welcome."" "
"""Now we  are  all here!""  said Gandalf,  looking  at  the  row of  thirteen hoods-the "
"like a whipped cur  whose master  has patted it. From  that moment a change, "
"     `So  it seems,' said Aragorn. `Yet where they  are,  and how many,  and "
"Eastward Sam  could  see the plain  of Mordor vast  and  dark below, and the "
applicable  names  in  very  loud  voices.  Soon  they  were  locked  in  one  another's 
they  will not turn shaft or blade. But they should serve you well: they are 
     'Swine  is  it? How  do  you  folk  like  being  called  swine  by  the 
"the invisible  heights above. He got up and shook himself.  `Well, let's  go "
"show him  the way out, as a reward instead of  a present. This account Bilbo "
line  and dragged  them  to  the  far  end of  the  cavern with  little Bilbo  tugging  at the 
shoulder. 
"Hort Portam,4798446363256,01-05-1996
"
"follows, his remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may be "
through or over this impenetrable wall and guard.  If once he could do  that 
 
and will despair of our coming.' 
and with a sigh dissolved into nothing. 
doom of  death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet 
in the earth. 
from 
     As  they drew near  Merry  saw  that  the rider was a  woman  with long 
 
"for days; but  the  lake was mightier  than he,  it would quench him before he could "
"known to him, as  to all the others. for it was appointed to me by Elrond of "
with his staff like a blind man. 
"his own eyes, Bilbo could see or feel that he was tense as a bowstring, gathered for "
"vision, I  will tell  you this.  The horn of Boromir at  least  returned  in "
upon their  knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders the  sun 
City  with their captains and knights; and  when they came  before the  Gate 
their headmen is being taken to  the king. Yonder  go the lights.  So much I 
"     'Good-bye, Cock -robin!' said Sam. 'I'll wait for you outside  The Green "
"fair she was still in my eyes, when I had last seen her, though  little like "
"""Not  till  he  says  what  he  means  by  lots  and  none  at  all,""  said  Bert.  ""I  don't "
""
"     The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans. "
was not turning to evil ways. But at any  rate he used to give no trouble to 
"Thorin?""  he  asked.  It  was  a  terrible  shock.  Of  course  there  were  only  thirteen of "
"shadows pass from memory. Tirelessly he strode  from Citadel to  Gate,  from "
it myself.' 
 
     'Look at me!' said Gandalf. 
 
third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell. 
"gone into the Shadow, and only time will show  what  doom awaits it  and us.  "
"Angeli Lishmund,4763972608987656,10-05-1982
"
""
manning of  the gate  and wall alone. Yet  they  knew that all the hills and 
"Linnell Minocchi,4041379815566,13-07-1977
"
to defy them. 
dreadful fright. 
began to break and the light grew broader. 
"the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden holds and outposts in "
yonder. There's an Eye in it. Come on! We've got to get down today somehow.' 
     'And  you have  found  him also!' cried  Aragorn. Giving his  reins  to 
"Hornblower,  of Longbottom  in the Southfarthing,  who  first grew  the true "
the  roll  of  the  benefactors  of  our  town;  and  he  is  worthy  of  many  imperishable 
Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.' 
"Such good will should not be denied. Say no more to any man, but come!' "
creatures'; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and 
"behind them,' said Faramir. `But in this I judge  that you speak  the truth. "
harm comes  of it. But I didn't  keep  it back a -purpose. I put  it by safe. 
"""Well, he'll have news to take to Lake-town all right, if that is what he is after,"" "
"is. Yes,  you know, Smjagol. It is before you.' "
folly or wisdom.' 
"     The wizard's face remained grave and attentive,  and  only a flicker in "
"     The  growing  light revealed to them  a  land already, less  barren and "
"dear friends,' he  said.  'But you  went  to the very brink of death ere  he "
willows.' 
Tookland and  bending south-eastwards they made for the  Green Hill Country. 
"Cleveland Saurat,4041598210375123,08-09-1989
"
     'Halflings!' laughed the Rider that stood beside Jomer. 'Halflings! But 
""
"Nester Snibson,4017956677066,30-07-1977
"
     Still round the corner there may wait 
"Calenhad, and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.' "
"####-""Go  on!  Go  on!""  he  shouted.  ""I  will  do  the  stinging!""  And  he did. He darted "
"him. He looked  up at the  smoke-streaked sky and saw strange phantoms, dark "
"of  the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are "
ups with  her umbrella and goes for the leader. near twice her size. So they 
     women then shall weep. War now calls us! 
with 
I 
"began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous. "
"""But how is it yours to give?"" he asked at last with an effort. "
""
"'All right! What is it?' said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered. "
"dwells in the  passes above Minas Morgul. If Cirith Ungol  is named, old men "
"Donelle Von Der Empten,4041595616079,31-08-1975
"
"     'They  are - at first sight at any rate,'  laughed  Pippin with  sudden "
"For I  shall take you  by the road that  Gandalf chose, and first I hope  to "
"suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall expect a  "
"and it brought him news. Marvelling he found he could understand its tongue, for "
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears 
on the ladder -head  and  fallen through the open trap-door. Sam gave no more 
all the way to  the borders of Rivendell before they can pick  up our trail. 
"after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down  at this end. I "
"were  covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the "
"     He searched the  wound on Frodo's shoulder with  his  fingers, and  his "
provided: he has few horsemen.' 
our own  trust  endanger our  land. We live  now  upon  an island  amid many 
"know all  about that, I guess.  So find what you think  is fit for a king to "
Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.' 
     And fair she was and free; 
"     'So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also,  or  "
the Mountain. 'It's no good taking anything we're not sure to need.' 
"shoulder of further hills, and down their long  limbs, and  up  their smooth "
"Cahra Brennen,4017954864443,06-06-1991
"
"flagging in the rays  of the  bright sun, winter sun shining in  a pale cool "
his neighbours. I used to talk to him.  There was a time when  he was always 
"Verney Causer,4017954668431514,15-08-1998
"
"be wondered at  that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of his fallen "
we venture on to that.' He pointed to the narrow way ahead. 
"bank,  threaded  by  a  winding  path;  and behind  that the tall  mountains "
above the trees on the brink of the valley. 
"     For  the  collection  of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE,  from a  contributor,  on an "
"     The  Harfoots had  much  to do  with Dwarves in ancient times, and long "
enemy is on your heels.' 
"good hearts!  Farewell, and may the  blessing of Elves and Men and  all Free "
that is in him.' 
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to  us  as the  Men  of 
fire. Out of the fire there spoke a commanding voice. 
     A ship then new they built for him 
"on my  side, if you understand me: nobody cares  for the woods as I care for  "
angry.' 
said  Legolas. 'And have  you marked  the brethren Elladan and Elrohir? Less 
"quietly  under my  very  nose  and  not  been  spotted,""  said Balin,  ""and  I  take  off my "
"don't do  as  he's  asked,' growled  Sam.  `Sam'll put  his head in it,  yes "
"     Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he "
"Norris Sawer,4521811909787105,03-01-1999
"
####- 
""
"closed  the shutters outside the window,  and drew  the  curtains.  The room "
"If I can get these coneys cooked, I'm going to wake him up.' "
"for  the sight, and the swifter for the  rest.  In the morning counsels  are "
"sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his legs, and blew out a beautiful grey ring "
"to grow again, could learn nothing of it.' "
"made peace, none the worse for being politic. I say, Thjoden King:  shall we "
and counted the leagues to Thjoden in Rohan. 'Will he come? Will he 
taking  the lantern from his  hand. It was dark on the climbing road between 
"     '""So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?"" "
"clouds  vanished southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue.  As  they "
"####-enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must  walk blind, while the sun is merry "
     'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to 
about him in wild tatters. The  ruins  of  what seemed a very war -tower  lay 
"rounded  up in  the  woods,  and those  that  surrendered were shown  to the "
"could  understand  what  he  said,  for  he  used  ordinary  language  and  not  bird-"
"     Where leaves of years were thickly strewn, "
"Antonetta Yokley,4041379593650,16-09-1997
"
is not their way. In dark and loneliness  they are strongest; they will  not 
"finger, or more like  a  warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun  was "
went  along  the  wall  as  hurriedly  as  they  could.  It  was  not  long  before  they  met 
"     `Peril lies ahead on every southward road,' answered Aragorn. `Wait for  "
"of the  mist and suddenly saw  all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he "
"seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the Shire. Whether they've "
move. 
The  other  dwarves  quite  agreed when  they  got  the message. They  all  thought 
"     'Not to  me,'  said  Frodo. 'To me it  feels  more  like falling asleep "
the red  glow there  came two orcs running . They  did not turn towards  him. 
"Chase Wotton,4041593549995766,11-07-2001
"
"     'Do I not say truly, Gandalf,' said Aragorn at last, 'that you could go "
"the  fair devices  on  their  shields,  would seem  outlandish in  their own "
     The  Lady  Jowyn greeted  them  and  was  glad of  their coming; for no 
people shall not be forgotten. But none of our gold shall thieves take or the violent 
"not look towards the hill,  but rode through its shadow with  head bowed and "
"Swertings we call 'em in our tales;  and they ride on oliphaunts, 'tis said, "
the  food ready.  Aragorn  bathed the hurts  with wa ter in which athelas was 
     'Orcs! ' said Frodo. `What are they doing? ' But the Elf had gone. 
 
     From the  king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He 
"not  hate  dwarves  especially,  no  more  than  they  hated  everybody  and  everything, "
"straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feel "
"Natassia McColley,4017951943604,21-06-2001
"
"Cindra Keane,4017953450462851,25-08-1993
"
they liked. At first goods and damage was paid  for by Pimple; but soon they 
useful-if these Nazgyl are all they make out.' 
"either. I am not trying to rob you,  but to help you. I wish you would trust  "
####-     'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?' 
make your journey less toilsome for  a while.  Yet they  will  not  give you  
""
we've  got  a room or two  in the  north wing  that  were made  special  for 
warily in pursuit of the last lantern before it disappeared among the trees.  
"Eddy Adrian,4017959583758,07-04-1986
"
"trees, and  gathered  dead  sticks and cones to make a fire. Soon they had a  "
"     West, west away, the round sun is falling. "
     At first the beauty of the  melodies  and  of  the interwoven  words in 
each  kind  walked  further down  their sundered  roads. Men  now  fear  and  
"steel he bore, but between rim and robe naught was there to see, save only a  "
"He was laughing! `I have it! '  he  cried. 'Of  course, of  course! Absurdly "
death to bandy crooked words  with a serving-man till the  lightning falls.' 
"with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament "
""
"for paths, and they say sneak, sneak. Very nice friends,  O yes my precious,  "
""
"behind, the midges still pursued them. "
"     `They  won't  come,  not before  you're dead  anyway,'  answered  Snaga  "
seemed 
 
chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit -architecture. 
"great, for my  strength.  I shall  have  such  need of it. Great  perils lie "
lowering cloud  above; and down  on the Pelennor it seemed for a  while less 
there  was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats broke  out wildly: 
"     'It  is going to be very dangerous, Sam. 'It is already dangerous. Most  "
"Reynard Trayes,4041592362537,12-05-1975
"
"Mar Avramov,4770660431294645,02-02-1982
"
"     'But how is  this?' asked Jomer. 'All is  vain, you say,  if he has the "
him and at his feet. 
"speed to the  foot of the  rock -wall. Then suddenly he looked up, while they  "
flowed without a sound. No voice  of  bird broke the silence.  The  sun grew 
"armies he had.  As far as their  eyes could reach, along the  skirts  of the "
the shapeless  lands before them; the sickly  green of them was fading  to a  
your name.' 
####-     They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river. 
"year  hung on  them,  grating  and  rattling  in  the  sad airs,  but  their "
"""Ha, ha!"" came a cry. ""Here's  the old villain with his head on a jug! He's been "
uncomfortable  feeling  that  the picking and choosing had not  really been meant  to 
"     Then  suddenly, as  before under the eaves of the  Emyn Muil,  Sam  saw "
little. But I don't know why I am talking like this. Where is that leaf? And 
"     ' ""Oh, are you  indeed, my  love,"" said  Smjagol; and he caught Deal by "
"the  Coomb,  and  then,  turning swiftly  eastwards, they  took  a path that "
stumbled blindly on in great pain and fear. He had been feeling rather pleased with 
"fearfully over their shoulders,  and  ever dragging their eyes  back to find "
pass.  Dark will come early this evening. We must leave  as  soon as you can 
could then slip in. 
"Gandalf had just  begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed  across "
"set on them now from both sides, before they are fully rested!"" "
"unless  they  have  come  here  since  I was  last  down  this way, which  is  some  years "
"away,  nine hours at least. Frodo was still fast asleep, lying now stretched "
"     The farmer looked at  him closely. 'Well, if it  isn't Master Pippin   - "
"the third night back from now at the rising of the moon."" "
"     Then there  was a pause, and after  it many swift scenes followed  that "
slipped off again while they talked. But what for this time?  
"hobbits down, and raised his curled  hands to his mouth so that they  made a  "
"a written message, in case they got in and  searched the house. But if Fatty "
"Janetta Nosworthy,4041376448902285,21-03-1975
"
"Kain Aberhart,4017956870463,03-01-1995
"
"Allin Zamorrano,4017951260433435,27-05-1997
"
"     Then  the  King welcomed  his  guests, and  they  alighted;  and Elrond "
""
and meet them!' 
"Ernestine Skaife d'Ingerthorpe,4017956189161,31-12-1998
"
hobbit-folk in  the early morning. In the night little  folk wake up in  the 
"     Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were ever  "
choose to  stay  and gnaw the ends of your old plots. Stay then!  But I warn 
the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the plain. 
"     Arose, and loud it cried, "
"Boromir whom he  loved best. He has long sight. He can perceive, if he bends "
"a  chance  before,  and  there  would  not  have  been  another  until  goodness  knows "
"Ros Irnis,4441458235210571,25-02-1976
"
Curtain was now become a dazzling veil of silk and pearls and silver thread: 
"sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder  "
"""Off you go!"" said Bilbo. ""I will wake you at midnight, and you can wake the "
"     'I will come,' said Aragorn. "
Shire!' 
to learn?' 
eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that  smote the face of the City. Then 
"seldom wore shoes, since  their feet had tough leathery soles  and were clad "
     `There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time ' said 
"     White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin! "
"Frasco Thunder,4041371049636,23-02-1987
"
"     `All right,' said Shagrat, `but we'll  talk of that later: Wait till we "
in a long cave or tunnel that bored into the  Mountain's  smoking cone.  But 
"far away. Yet one stood  there still:  Dernhelm  the  young, faithful beyond "
"Baillie Baglan,4017953315793,15-01-1996
"
"whom you will, even that friend whose  folly brought you to this death. Send "
"     Through shadows to the edge of night, "
     'Pride and despair!' he cried.  'Didst thou  think that the eyes of the 
"lumpy chin like  dry  moss.  He was  short-legged and fat-armed,  thick  and "
shadow under it. He was coming to the top of  the steps and was in the Cleft  
"Burnard Castagnone,4944879092091,24-05-1993
"
gates of the king closed behind them with a clang. 
The orc-archers shot wildly and then fled. 
""
"porter,  and  one  for  coffee,  and  all  of  them  for  cakes;  so  the hobbit was kept very "
     At  the  Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards went 
####-we are. Maybe you have heard  of Trolls? They  are mighty strong. But Trolls 
"spies  slip  through every net, and his birds  of ill omen are abroad in the "
Ithil.' 
"everything  that he could  remember  of Gandalf's words.  Time went on,  and "
often found as leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even 
"     `He's  going out of harm's way,  I  tell  you,' answered Shagrat. 'See?  "
curtain  in front  of the arched bay. The water was  gathered  again into  a  
be all right; but I hate the whole business.' 
"     Yes,  we  have  won,  but  only  the first victor  and  that  in itself "
"floods to poisoned fish. Think of something cheerful!"" "
"     'And I will come, too,' said Gimli. 'The matter  of the  Lady Galadriel "
in Middle-earth; his kin that  live still in latter days are but memories of 
"round hill smooth and  bare, standing by itself,  the  most northerly of the "
"wider, and then Strider  and Merry  went in. They did not go far, for on the "
dying fire. 
"     'To see how your work goes, my friend,' said Gandalf, 'and to thank you  "
"then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there  appeared above the "
"     'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the "
"or Gollum,  he won't change  his habits in a hurry, I'll warrant. You  go to "
""
"she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought "
     For a moment the sight of  it  gladdened the hearts of the hobbits; but 
"About  it stood fir-trees, short and bent,  and  its  sides were  steep  and "
Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of  asking you what 
"and then I don't suppose I, or any one else, will ever see you again."" "
     Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. 'There is a fire in the 
wheeled round and charged  again. Most  of the raiders that were  left alive 
from dark and noisome pools. The reek of  them hung  stifling  in the  still 
"mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the  sunlight. One would have "
"are valiant. Why, cousin, one  of them went  with only his esquire  into the "
"battered  black-leather  scabbard.  From  a  locked  drawer,   smelling   of "
"the Ring. In wisdom or  great folly it has been sent away  to be  destroyed, "
"many thanks. 'I  hope we shall  meet again some  day, when things are  merry "
"Andriana Trett,4076798815262217,30-01-1985
"
"     `It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag. "
be spared  were busy quelling the flames that sprang up in many places. Then 
"Emilio Kleanthous,4041373000644520,24-02-1985
"
     It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb  the 
would 
"     'No, no!'  said  Gimli.  'Let  us leave  them!  I guess  their  thought "
"alone,  swollen  till  the  mountains  could no longer  hold her up and  the "
     Renewed shall be blade that was broken: 
"lids. He removed  one of the lids, and dipped  in a great ladle, and with it "
"morning. Nothing  had  been  heard  in  the  night, but more  trouble  would "
of them or hew them with axes. But many of the strongest and  most desperate 
gently. 
"quick as you may!"" "
the Shire. 
"they find  you  here. Come quickly, if you  wish  to escape  death.  Come to "
"     Yet  he himself wept  as he spoke.  'Let  his knights remain  here,' he "
"Gladys Emblin,4017953085602,16-10-1997
"
spurs that nearly meet. That must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge  
"thoughtfully, as if he guessed  what Frodo  had in  mind. 'We should  not go "
once. I heard news  of them only after  I left you in  June; but that  story 
"them again. 'Here there  are eight,' he said. `Nine were to set out: so said "
"####-on, and  then no one will  see him. He'll be  there but not  seen. Not even our clever "
"growing  of vegetables  - in the matter of 'roots', especially  potatoes, the "
"Virgie Korpal,4017953896792,29-12-1994
"
"such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.' "
"foretell. Not  to evil, I think. He may become  like a glass filled  with  a  "
"Sheilakathryn Haggleton,4017950410134,13-05-2001
"
"Oralla Drinnan,4337597782606561,24-03-1977
"
"yours,  if you have not seen each night after dark a great bear going along with us "
     But Gandalf said:  'This is much  to demand for  the  delivery  of  one 
troubled by the Eye: so he called it to  himself. It was that more  than the 
good  bea st of burden. You must lay aside much  of the stuff that we brought 
"     Troll's old seat is still the same, "
"Don; next On and Nori, Bifur and Bofur; and last Dwalin and Bombur."" "
"Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed  the river by "
     Chapter 4   A Short Cut to Mushrooms  
"tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him-and if he'll have you.' "
"of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they look out over  "
"Otes Truggian,4017952263713,22-10-1985
"
"Cass Say,4041597486827429,24-10-1977
"
"Brooks Enders,4041376034051521,18-09-1986
"
"Murdock D'Adamo,4041592657676309,12-04-1990
"
"they were  taller. According to the Red Book,  Bandobras Took  (Bullroarer), "
"Darwin Nester,4041374419992,03-04-1989
"
"####-could come behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin, and so come upon "
was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the  soldiers of Gondor  and 
"Felecia Draco,4017958133654592,17-09-1979
"
"Madalena Rought,4017953011764662,17-09-1977
"
"to lessen  the slope, often stumbling forward, and at the last crawling like "
clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands. 
true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of.' 
"The faggots are reeking, "
"tomorrer,"" said one of the trolls. "
"into his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to "
anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was  inside a song. if you take 
"Cornelius Kinahan,4951110846797,24-10-1997
"
you will not say that the journey was  in vain  -- not though the Glittering 
"right down through the heart of the mountains, and are now on the other side-quite "
     'Other evils there are  that may come;  for  Sauron  is  himself  but a  
and feel. 
"Barnie Ruppele,4041591861442904,23-08-1998
"
""
lamenting  their  lost  town and goods and  ruined houses. But  they had  really much 
"in the City Wall was at  the  east  point of the circuit, but the next faced "
"     'I thought that I  was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of "
to Minas Tirith.' 
"stair-door, caught a glimpse of his evil face as it passed: it was scored as "
Lords of the Mark in their  order: Eorl the Young;  and Brego builder of the  
"himself.  At last he sat  up. 'Come  now!' he said. 'Time  wears on, and the "
 
""
as  a tried warrior in  the  fulness  of  his strength.  He was the Lord  of 
""
"that  the trees were still  there. He felt  that the  Company was too naked, "
"and they are crafty and  unlike the boats of other folk. They will not sink, "
"Rivendell,  which he  visited  more  than  once.  There, though  Elrond  had "
""
"""It's me, Bilbo Baggins,  companion  of Thorin!""  he  cried,  hurriedly  taking  off "
"only thing he had ever cared for, his precious. The cry brought Bilbo's heart to his "
"     The hobbits  did not understand his  words, but as  he spoke they had a "
"     'Wind  is  changing!' he cried, and  with  that, in a  twinkling as  it "
""
"consuming flame, but his fear rose like a vast black smoke to choke him. For "
"     He ran on,  down, down towards the outer city. Men flying back from the "
that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? ' 
"lower  gates  of  the mines,  on the eastward  side of the mountains.  There "
call  loudly  for  men  to  bring  him  fire  and  food.  Now  everywhere  Bard  went  he 
getting anything out of him. On  thinking  things over he was now  regretting  some 
"Leon Szymonowicz,4212192355128,09-02-1992
"
"answers, packing up presents, and making  some  private preparations  of his "
"""Thank you!""  said Thorin a bit gruffly; but Gandalf was already off his horse "
"     The  travellers trotted on, and as the  sun began to  sink towards  the "
to himself. 
"I said soon, not instantly. If  you can think of any way of slipping out  of "
"Rammas  was broken, and all the Pelennor  abandoned  to the Enemy.  The last  "
"####-the tables to the  dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of "
"They marvelled  to  see  with  what speed  these green-clad men  now  moved, "
"guess that  Saruman was to blame, and that  long ago he had been spying  out "
between  bright margins:  on  the  right  and  west  the  Silverlode  flowed 
"mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks. "
"     The white lilies sway, "
"Dwain Hawarden,4765416762742,24-10-1982
"
"word to Jowyn. She, she would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see "
my  own  sake. A  hunted  man sometimes  wearies  of distrust  a nd longs for 
"     'Now,  now!' said Gimli. 'We are beginning the story  in the middle.  I "
"the  West, and  only  as it sank at last into the Sea did the Sun escape  to "
"haste and danger. Ride with us now, if the king will give his leave. ' "
"for which his language  had no  name.  All that  he saw was shapely, but the "
half blocked with fallen stone  near the top. There  we sat high up above the 
worse than Gollum did. It's scattered about  and some  of it is trampled and 
"     Gandalf, however,  disbelieved Bilbo's first story, as soon as he heard "
unmoved faces.  But when they had  come  almost  to the end of  the line one 
"Maurene Seavers,4041373624089,12-05-1984
"
"forgotten, in  the  South Incbnus, in  the North Gandalf;  to the East  I go "
"     'That cannot be helped  now,' said Gandalf.  `Whether they are good  or  "
"round Treebeard,  standing quite still.  He  spoke  to  them for a little in "
"     'I wonder what's up,' said  Sam. 'Is there  a storm coming? If  so it's "
"Shaylyn Kees,4614028465080,30-05-1999
"
"mean.  What  about  bed,  and  an  early  start,  and  all  that?  I  will  give  you  a  good "
"     'I don't know, and I would rather  not guess,'  said Frodo. 'All right, "
"draws nigh inevitably,  if you  ride  upon this  road which you have  taken. "
"it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never ""faded"".  He is  thin and tough "
"     'No, he is gone,' said Jowyn turning away and  looking at the mountains "
"Lela Rown,4726508135775,16-09-1977
"
"lights wavered, dimmed, and went out. "
     In  the morning he  woke to  find that the rain had stopped. The clouds 
"####-whetting his long knife. There was  for a while a lull in the assault, since "
that the Orcs had  pressed on with all possible speed. Every  now  and again 
"one  of the trees, and there they saw that  a  great stone jar had been set. "
say.' 
"saw it from a window, I tell you. And they wer e the last.' "
     Then he called to Ioreth and he said: 'You have store  in this House of 
"     `Perhaps so,'  said Aragorn. `But it  will  be  hard to find  the  path "
you  look  rather  like  one.  It  is  a  fair morning  with  little  wind. What  is  finer  than 
slowly by like grey ghosts.  
cloak of  dark  green over a coat of fine mail; on the front of his helm was 
we  shall have to try  to get  one pony at least. But so ends  all  hope  of 
"####-among clouds and long flags of smoke, but even the sunlight was defiled. The "
Arrows  were thick in the air. Then suddenly straight over  the rim of their 
His heart was filled and pierced with enchantment and with the desire of dwarves; 
"     'We  always seem  to have got   left out of the  old lists, and the  old "
"to  their design, prisoners and  slaves  that have  to work  till  they die  for want of air "
march  through  the  long  green  grass  and  down  the  lines  of  the  wide-armed oaks 
They do not and did not understand or like machines more  complicated than a  
light  of  his  torch.  At  last  he  looked  down  upon  it  and  he  caught  his  breath.  The 
"     'Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he always "
the  rocks  below.  He  rubbed  his  eyes.  Surely  there  was  a  camp  still  in  the  plain 
"     Ents in a  solemn  row stood like  statues at the gate, with their long "
dawned as fair and  clear  as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still 
""
"The streams shall run in gladness, "
"     'Very  well,  Sam. If you wish to go, I'll come,' said  Frodo; and they "
feet as well as with his hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night. 
house in peace for a while.' 
"Ashien Rubinek,4438243789679354,21-11-1995
"
leaned on. 
     'It is not clear to  me that the  will of Thjoden son of  Thengel  even 
"people are abroad, for there are great tidings in the South – some are tidings of joy "
     when winter comes without a spring 
"""King  Bard!  King  Bard!""  they  shouted;  but  the Master  ground  his  chattering "
"     To music of a pipe unseen, "
"Nikki Darlaston,4017957742331,05-11-1990
"
""
"and comforting, and the mist before his  eyes seemed to be lifting a little. "
"He  gazed  for  what  seemed  an  age,  before  drawn  almost  against  his  will,  he "
down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing: 'Nothing passes doors  or 
give it up. You'll never get to the top anyway.' 
wings.  The  air  rushed  over  him  and  he  shut  his  eyes.  The  dwarves  were  crying 
grew faint with the  first  grey  of morning. Gollum  had shown  no signs of 
stone and ridges like notched knives sprang out in staring black against the 
them bore the  mark DALE  on them; which did not  convey much to most of 
     The Company set out again with good speed at first; but soon their  way 
"####-slay him with his sword. But  pity stayed him, and though  he kept the ring, "
in turn to carry him on their backs. 
nice Smjagol! ' 
Wise I  am  the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch  of 
"But  the  hobbit  was  worried  and  uncomfortable,  and  they  had  difficulty  in "
"stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,' he said. "
"     'Yes, I am. I feel  I  need a holiday, a very  long holiday, as I  have "
own city! But whither now shall I go? ' 
have  wandered over  them for many years. I  am  older than  I look. I might  
"     'There's more  than one passage here,'  he whispered with an effort: it "
 
"He did not wake up of course, but went still on and on, till all sign of the door "
still  listening  for a little  hoping  perhaps  to learn something  useful. 
"Reinhold Wilkins,4041371629139146,28-08-1975
"
"     The  third part tells of the  last defence against the Shadow,  and the "
noisome 
     Not even to die. 
and examined the ends. `Nor it hasn't neither. Not a strand!' 
"####-     The harpers harped, the minstrels sang, "
"leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope and fear "
while I sit by?' 
"can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.' "
far away. 
"Tabbitha MacKenzie,4041379075880,07-09-1988
"
"stream running  through it; it  comes  out  of  the  mountains, and flows on "
high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold. A trailing plant 
"     Just  then  some hobbits, who had  been sent out towards Hobbiton, came "
"hill lay  dark  on the road. Then Frodo begged them to  hasten, and he would  "
"staff. His head was bowed,  and he did not look towards them. In other lands "
"Niles Tarpey,4688388454090127,21-08-1991
"
"messages, such  as I can contrive, to  those  whom I know in the wide world;  "
     `Do not touch the water!' said the  Lady  Galadriel softly. The  vision 
"way as it climbed  north, until he came to the rock -steps where long ago, no  "
"Carina Cordoba,4041598997942426,31-01-2001
"
"""As soon as we were asleep,"" went on Gandalf, ""a crack at the back of the cave "
"Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.' "
"     `Let it be so then. You shall go,' said Elrond, and he sighed. 'Now the "
"     It  was generally agreed that the joke was  in very bad taste, and more "
is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is 
"I see there?' he asked, pointing down to the  middle of the great  curve  of "
Chapter 1. The Tower of Cirith Ungol 
will seem no great wonder. Farewell!' 
'I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement 
was high time for some meal or other; but that only made him miserabler.  
""
down 
"given. For we must prepare against  all chances, good as well as  evil. Now,  "
"Tyson Verna,4568025213820,07-07-1990
"
had risen a  good  deal.  He thrust  the Ring away  and tightened his  belt. 
"dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilbo "
"why; what  you know;  whether you were captured,  and if so, how you escaped "
"Hollyanne De Mattia,4041592661136,13-12-1990
"
"mountains, and together through ages  of  the world we have fought  the long "
with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry. 
can't fly can jump!' 
"post-office  was blocked, and the Bywater post -office  was snowed under, and "
approach me?  I  kill where  I wish  and  none  dare  resist.  I  laid  low  the warriors of 
"still and unruffled. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all sides "
"valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world. "
"Ynez Penketh,4041599884524459,05-08-1991
"
     'Then all at once there was  a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the 
"Ransom Elwood,4041375189807158,20-06-1975
"
names if you're not careful.' 
"trampled  him  was  his  one  thought.  He  issued  from  the  Gate,  the  waters  rose  in "
     And in her raiment glimmering. 
"middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow. "
"Gandalf  the Grey: so condescending, and  so very  kind. I do not doubt that "
"sank,  and  before  them the distant mountains loomed a  little nearer.  Yet "
have been. I have done this and that. I have  written some more of my  book. 
"the Lake and elsewhere."" "
"could be  seen or heard. He crept  slowly  on, bent almost  double. Then  he "
party!' 
"Christian Godehard.sf,4041374193158799,04-12-1984
"
"     'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light  heart,' "
here and Stone-folk's new walls. Many busy  there. Walls stand up no longer: 
of dark smoke wavered in the hot air. 
"Glorfindel, `two things only remain  for  us to attempt: to send it over the "
"     'Yes,' he said, 'they are quite plain:  a hobbit's footprints. Pippin's "
"there seemed something more: an air of richness and growth, and a gleam of a  "
"Mahmud Cropton,4041377382784986,12-06-1995
"
     Frodo  broke  off a portion  of a wafer  and handed it  to him  on  its 
shoulders. Now and again they came  to  rough  places  and were  lifted from 
Orcs. It needed little skill to find. 
he  got and ran on.  He  came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen  by the 
"he  would  probably  have  gone  on  like  this  until  he  was  out  of  breath,  without "
 
wonder greatly  what brings  four hobbits  on so long a journey. Nothing like 
"     'We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,' he said. "
"     'Are you angry with me, Gandalf?' he  said, as their guide went out and "
"take.  The  road east  to the plain, or the pass back westward,  those  they "
"down  upon the Nazgyl they bore, stooping suddenly out of the high airs, and "
"     Still  on and up the  stairway bent and  crawled, until  at last with a  "
shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son 
"Willard Pride,4041594886343,07-06-1975
"
"nobody  seems to  want it to. If  there's any magic  about,  it's right down "
"Ettore Whiteway,4041591478248736,22-12-1993
"
"the way back when they were attacked again. by a hundred Orcs at least, some "
"Janeta Chetwin,4041597458244199,07-01-1988
"
banks while the light  lasted. It was already night when at last they halted 
"there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine, but now, after some fifty "
"Gillian Strickland,4041597645431,25-10-1977
"
while they ate their  mid-day meal. As  the sun rose  and  passed  noon they 
my quiver is empty.' He  searched  in the  pile  and on the ground about and 
"before  the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas  is "
"and setting him before him, he turned Shadowfax with a word. Up the climbing "
 
"the  Elder Days, and  was  -now walking  in  a world that  was  no  more.  In "
"Bay Bolderson,4041590816461720,25-10-1991
"
"onslaught  and  the  elf-charge was halted,  there  rose  from across  the valley a deep-"
"Manfred Kidder,4017952313963,31-03-1995
"
"when put to it, do without them,  and could survive rough handling by grief,  "
two 
"rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I "
"for any tale. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and drank for the "
"with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he "
muttered  to himself.  'I don't like this great big tree. I  don't trust it. 
"emergency,  which no  longer occurred, the Thainship  had  ceased to be more "
fell  and  the  air grew  heavy with expectancy. The hobbits could  see that 
(including himself). 
"expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the  "
"were  debated  among us,  did I think of Isildur's  Bane as being  this same "
through the green  fields of Rohan and  came to Edoras;  and  there they all 
 
"almost as linen, cold as ice,  and  harder than steel. It shone like moonlit "
elven-cloaks.  
"while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir! ' "
timber  sent  down  from  the  Forest.  Then  they  set  about  raising  many  huts  by  the 
down  the  road. They saw the barrier and laughed. They did not imagine that 
"Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits,  as if he  was "
ever heard of that we  don't want to see any closer; and that's the one place 
by strong arms  and heavy feet. Here and  there old trees  had  been cut  or  
he said. `But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the 
"all the same, and then we'll hang him head downwards for a day or two."" "
with grief!' 
"not leaves, but the sound of the  Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in "
"on a wide  flat rock without rail or parapet. At their right, eastwards, the "
"'We reached the forest -eaves before them, and if after that any living thing "
swiftly.  The blade turned  on  the hidden  mail-coat  and snapped.  A dozen  
"slain about him, or else mastered by the madness of  their steeds were borne "
     Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as  he ran he stumbled in his 
"their camp.  They set  a watch, but had no sight nor sound of their enemies.  "
""
far there is still to go?' 
"jored,  men of  my own household; and  we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two "
"a  narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world.  The  sun shone "
 
"     `That's what I'm going  to do,'  said Shagrat in angry tones.  'Put him "
"might  have  had  some  trouble  guessing  it,  if  he  had  asked  it  at  another time. As it "
wearily. After a moment he spoke again. 
"the journey, when my own ran  out. But now it comes in useful after all.' He "
"them. Still blind they went on for  some  little time,  up  and  then gently "
"if to himself, he sang softly in the dark: "
"     The  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  mountains,  and the  shadows  were "
couple  of  hundred of the dirty creatures  in  this place.  A bit of a tall 
"passed, and  they seemed  not to touch him.  He showed no signs of age.  The "
"     'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.  "
"think not,' said Strider.  'They are not all here yet. And in any  case that "
were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the leaves. The wind 
"private talks  he would have before  he  got to  bed,  and  what  they would "
     'O Sam!' cried Frodo. `What have I said? What have I done? Forgive  me! 
"Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and especially Thorin!"" "
"meal, and then Frodo said with a  sigh: 'Well, I suppose it is time now that "
"could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and  set it in its place. "
""
`but change and growth is not in all  things and places alike. For the Elves 
"Weber Greg,4041375241221,19-01-1991
"
     'Though  the  Stewards  deemed  that  it  was  a secret  kept  only   by 
we  say in the Shire; and  I daresay  we  shall all look much the same after  
whether  any Rider gets into  Buckland or not. We don't know  how many there 
"dangerous too. Try a bit further,  and then we'll lie close and have a rest. "
"unabashed,  set  to  a second time. 'We  must keep our guests company,' they  "
slimed  by  the  passing  of  the  dragon.  Now  before  them  the  water  fell  noisily 
Chief's Men must know that. They'll try to stamp on us and put us out quick. 
saw a vast roof  far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of 
"dangerous flight, and  the rumours  of  the darkness growing  in  the  world "
"ashamed.  If  you do no  more  in  this  war, you have already earned  great "
perhaps you don't mind bad smells.' 
"     'We shall  break  a  good many things  yet, and not ask you to answer ' "
above. 
great mountains had marched down very near to them. Already they I seemed only 
"Lady's gift.  Merry and  Pippin in the middle  boat  were  ill at  ease, for  "
"the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased. "
"""Never guessed!""  said Gollum. Then  suddenly out of  the gloom came a  sharp "
"wide  door upon the  left, at  the  top of a stair. It opened  direct into a  "
"     'I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I  "
     At that moment from far off the  wind bore to their listening ears  the 
 
"pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he  never need hear that "
"all other bridges  and roads,  speed the king's messengers, and  acknowledge "
     Merry and Pippin dragged themselves  forward  and  lay down  with their  
the forest. 
"seven years! "" said  I. ""Now I can take a night's  rest, the first  since  I "
"     He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune, "
to follow. For it  is perilous  for mortal man  to walk  out of the world of 
found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy 
"behind, waiting anxiously. `Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a  "
"Devonne Hardage,4017951048358615,03-04-1999
"
"     'That I feared  it too,' Aragorn answered, `but less than other things. "
the likeliest chance. Lead on!' 
"while Balin, who came last, made a great fuss about his air-holes and said he was "
"floors  tiled  and  carpeted,  provided with  polished  chairs,  and  lots  and  lots of pegs "
"     But he answered: 'Two reasons there may be, but which is true, l do not "
"Gregorio Stritton,4017952688997274,13-03-1986
"
"land well  within twenty miles of  Hobbiton, but that was  the  limit of his "
wind  in many branches. The Ents were  drawing  near the  crest of the ridge 
He sighed and bent his head. 
"     A shadow seemed to pass by the  window, and the hobbits glanced hastily "
"last, however,  Balin  listened to  the whispers,  and resolved   to  go; and "
"ends in estre. Yes, it  must  be  yestre followed by day being  the tenth of "
"Noel Breissan,4949772523188191,25-04-2001
"
"     At the top of the lane the party halted, and Frodo and his friends went "
of the  evil lands  into which they would go. Aragorn  should  find some two 
"     `Balin will find no  ring in  Moria,'  said  Gandalf. `Thrur gave it to "
"     'All right, but there's room enough for two.' "
the stair cut its way deeper  into the  sheer mountain the rocky walls  rose 
"several times, and they lost all sense of direction. They climbed  upwards a  "
"The  pale  peaks  of  the mountains were  coming  nearer, moonlit  spikes  of  rock "
"with  him,  if  they  prefer  the  cold  shores  under  the  shadow  of  the Mountain  to  the "
"them  take  provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves  with treasures,  "
truth.' 
soon  venture  into  that  forest  and  that  after  the mountains  it  was  the  worst  of  the 
""
"""Shut  up!""  said  they,  ""or  we'll  never  have  done.  And  yer  can  fetch  the water "
"could not  allow it. I decided that  long ago, too. You speak of danger, but "
"about  its  Throne.  Nearer  and nearer it drew,  looming blacker, like  the "
"go, and there is time ahead for thought. It is something to have started.' "
you to say to that?' 
"Gilburt Mowett,4041593682578,29-11-2001
"
that  you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli  
"his  mouth,  in  spite  of  his  ring,  for  he  could  not  prevent  the  keys  from  making "
"were great standing stones that had been carved in the likeness of men, huge "
glooms when the wind is in the East?' 
"     'Ah! you know best,'  said the landlord, knowingly.  'I won't give  you  "
"she stood, then turning swiftly she was gone. "
"Michel Narrie,4694443424581,27-05-1987
"
"bearing his token of the Ship and  the Silver Swan, and a company of knights "
they can find in their wise hearts.' 
"back they rode  the mountain-fields, until they came to  a  bridge over  the "
"     It s not that, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, and he went ver red. "
""
"mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and  so speedily he bore me that "
another draught with me before you go?' 
     Presently Frodo  got  up and  walked away;  and Sam saw that  while the  
and  all  of  them  could  get  at  stones;  and  Bilbo  had  his  elvish  dagger.  Again  and 
"     'Tell me,' he  said, 'is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at least "
"expect to use this, and I don't need it  now, except to  look  at sometimes. "
cannot yet have perished; for light boats used to journey  out of Wilderland 
as an arrow or an edgewise stone. 
the Tower -gate. 
Thjoden hbl!' she  said. 'Receive  now this  cup  and drink  in happy  hour. 
"there, like  as  not I'll only  see the  stars,  or something that  I  won't  "
warrant.' 
"howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang to his side "
"terror. The  ranks of the orcs had opened, and they crowded away, as if they "
"####-short  incline,  he  saw,  filtering  round  another  corner-a  glimpse  of  light.  Not  red "
"their hands  and  feathers in their caps,  looking both important and rather  "
"Samantha Hammel,4119298856026133,09-01-1984
"
think of riddles that could save him from being eaten. 
"     'Me,  sir!' cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.  'Me "
"in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in  Durin's Tower  carved in "
 
"eager for stories of Isildur, though of him we had less to tell; for nothing "
"and we must  still  think of our frontier to the  north and east, as his own "
"and they are heedless, busy in destruction.' "
"packs that lived under the shadow of the goblin-infested mountains, over the Edge "
"wonder what became  of it. I should  like  another look.  Have you  got  it, "
""
"in  their  very meeting-place. They  thought  they were  friends of  the woodmen, and "
"came out from  behind  a cloud, he laughed  if  they came upon a  stream  or  "
     They did not find the going  any easier at the  broken feet of the Emyn 
"     'Unless  our enemies rest also, they  will  leave us far  behind, if we "
away. 
"Middle-earth, and a giver of  gifts beyond  the power of kings. He has dwelt  "
see from the faint glimmer on the walls. 
"Andrea Pegram,4353622106074129,15-05-1976
"
"and lordly  they are,  and the  Riders  of Rohan look  almost as boys beside "
"Mignonne Kenneway,4041373974039,18-05-1993
"
"     They  all hurried  forward,  hobbits  and  ponies. Already  half  their "
"size  but  provided  with  a  bitter  sword  and  great  courage,  figured  most "
     One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news  reached the Ivy Bush 
"Nobe Tyndall,4066029392986784,09-08-1981
"
     'Devilry of Saruman! ' cried  Aragorn.  'They have crept  in the culvert 
"####-""May  the  wind  under  your  wings  bear  you  where  the  sun  sails  and  the moon "
"straining towards us,  blind  almost to all  else that is moving. So we must "
charging; and the change might come  suddenly.  I wonder  if  Treebeard will 
"     'To  hope, maybe, but  not to  toil,'  said Aragorn. 'We shall not turn "
only the very fainter glow to be seen. 
"Ted Shills,4041593178338,29-09-1980
"
and a  few more crumbs in the grass.  And  see! there are  some pieces of cut 
wind had  died and  the  evening  was heavy. Already  the  closing  hour was 
"     'That would be Ori's hand,' said Gimli, looking  over the wizard's arm. "
"uncomfortable, palpitating, and even gruesome, may make a good tale, and take a "
"     `I wish I was back there,' he said. `But how can I return without shame "
     They neigh and champ their silver bits; 
"comfort in this,  daughter, since comfort you seem to need in your grief for  "
on either side. Suddenly  a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black; 
"     'I  have no  memory of this  place  at all! '  said  Gandalf,  standing "
"It  was  a long and  merry  meal. Though  the hobbits ate, as only  famished "
what 
"     `And you, Ring-bearer,' she said, turning to Frodo. `I come to you last "
"hobbits, when this  place was built.  On  the  ground  floor as they usually "
you  are  enemies  of  goblins  and  are  not  up  to  any  mischief  in  my  lands-what are 
come out of it. 
should not be touched. We  may  not  have a chance of filling  our skins and 
"wider  on  either  side.  Paths  had  vanished,  and many  a  rider  and wanderer  too,  if "
"     'I do not know,' said Gandalf. 'I do not think  they know themselves. I "
"in our need.  He knows our need,  none better.  Great service he could  have "
"to hang on, and whether he should risk the chance of  letting go and trying to swim "
"some  time  they had been cut  off  from  the  world, as if  in an invisible "
     With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before  the narrow opening of the 
"None of the people of the valley dared to approach it, nor would  they dwell  "
"     'Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom,' said Faramir.  And  they said no "
remained silent and unmoved. 
"years, all packed into a few moments. "
     Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in  the room. Merry was standing 
     A light from the shadows shall spring; 
"reporting  to his master  such matters as had often been heard before, small "
of that journey.' 
"come.  In this place will I abide,  and  my heirs, unto  the  ending of  the "
"     'You will do as you wi ll, my lord Aragorn,' said Thjoden.  'It  is your "
"great praise  and friendship they departed, and  came at  length  to  Helm's  "
"Bobbie Walduck,4041596563475771,23-06-1996
"
"broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had some elvish power.' "
"feat  seemed  to amuse  the Ents very much, to judge by the  tone  of  their "
"by  another  not  far  away  to  the  left.  It  was  wolves  howling  at  the  moon,  wolves "
"and beauty, it was known far and wide and people would come long journeys "
####-tray and gathering up the broken crockery. 
some nameless menace of power and doom. 
"mountains  into many works of metal  and of  stone, and into  many songs and "
"Pietra Kuhle,4041595298019,12-03-1994
"
"banks with low hedges on top. Round a bend,  about a  furlong from  the main "
"saith I do  not  know; but I trace here a copy  of it,  lest it fade  beyond "
""
"Lezlie Weadick,4041374828236341,15-12-1987
"
"Ashleigh Aspling,4017957065691,25-02-1996
"
"Ansley Trevear,4041370977258,01-08-1984
"
"aisles  of the  wood  were  already  wrapped in  dusk,  stretching away into "
""
unadorned save for  a single silver rune upon the lid.  `Here  is set  G for  
"End, Under-Hill, again. "
"     'Can't  anything be done,  Mr. Butterbur?' asked Frodo. 'Can't we get a  "
     And then to Sam's surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee before 
on their right. 
"     'Always my days  have seemed  to me  too short to  achieve  my desire,' "
     Down  the great stairway they plodded. The  high chamber of the  turret 
"places, she said it was to be. The star-glass!  ' "
"conversation. These last words were  more  than he  could bear, and bursting  "
"Egon Cadagan,4041590312526,23-04-1988
"
"Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you  Shirriffs look  a  "
hills. 
little enough for days before that. It seems a long while since we could eat 
evil they have done.' 
     GANDALF. 
"Sam  and his master. Either she did  not see Sam, or she avoided him for the "
'Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of  Saruman's  double 
"     'Dressed up like this, sir?' said Sam. 'Where are my clothes?' He flung "
Then Mr. Baggins  turned  the handle and went in. The Took side had won. He 
sad. 
'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to  the Fords: and ten more from there 
"Imelda Jinks,4041370160509,21-08-1981
"
in 
"that  he was  very  fond  of  flowers. ""Dear me!"" she went on. ""Not  the Gandalf who "
"how  they had got away,  they  told me  to hold my  tongue, and said  that one day  in "
"rim of open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still  a mile  or two "
"was  no  signs  of them,  and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by  the roadside. He "
"pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make merry while the day lasted. "
laughter in the trees: 
"you go back and tell them so from me."" "
"     ' ""Be off!"" I said. ""There are no Bagginses  here.  You're in the wrong "
 
"down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he looked at the thing "
further. They shouldn't have let you walk at all; but you must forgive them. 
"Joachim Grelka,4017954469131321,15-08-1976
"
they asked one after another.  
"Leone Showers,4041598625978,19-09-1993
"
and put a lot of men on the gates at nights.' 
shield and his war-horn. 
""
"I can.' said Frodo.  He looked  about, but there seemed  nowhere even for an "
dropped but the sky was grey. The land looked rather sad and forlorn; bu t it 
"their own. To his amazement, as he listened Frodo   became aware that  it was "
Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow!  
"####-not know how to deal with it. His wizardry may have been falling off lately,  "
"white and silver coming from the  North, like a small star down on the dusky "
"Wasn't it guarded, Gollum? ' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught  "
"the trees. It felt as if thunder was  brewing. Gollum often paused, sniffing "
"faces elven-fair,  clad  alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver -grey. "
"Fanny Mac Geaney,4630599857497,26-04-1998
"
low door; both were closed and locked. There was no sound at all. 
"Rees Luckes,4041375234176427,27-02-1987
"
"Rohirrim, the Riders of  the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and "
     Aragorn and his  companions sat  themselves down at  one  end of a long 
in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back  
""
"Alyson Carl,4041597919756518,08-02-1992
"
""
to all the  Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire-writing 
"fallen in  their tracks as they  ran, with grey-feathered arrows sticking in "
"Hagan Ion,4017955278445,06-08-1983
"
"     'Then I  will,'  said Saruman.  'Worm killed  your  Chief,  poor little "
"fingers at rain, and at Black Riders.  The last few  miles, they felt, would "
"grew there,  planted  long ago,  falling  into untended age amid a  riot  of "
"Elisha Youll,4041372950949,12-04-1985
"
and gazed on the strangers with dark eyes.  
     'But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough  to  know that  there are 
"     Pippin laughed. 'Well, it's time you  made it up. Especially if you are "
     At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety  that they 
"'speaking poetry'), and began: "
first put it into pipes.  Not even the Wizards first thought of that  before 
"Rosetta Crilley,4262916142997,25-03-1978
"
"turned from your own way at my counsel. See, you have  spoken  skilfully, as "
"     `I have myself  been at whiles in Rohan, but I have  never  crossed  it "
done? Have those eyes come back? ' 
him.' 
"Gladi Colwell,4041592606724424,21-07-1989
"
them the Brown Lands now. 
"has been a cloak to us. And now, lusting to destroy Gondor and throw it down "
water. He was slipping forward. 
walk?' 
"was on him, as he walked the  dangerous road from  Emyn Muil to Morgul "
"the Black Stone,' he said.  'And lo! in the darkness of Mordor my hope rose;  "
"stone  enchanted.  All  the  noise  of  the  dwarves  lost  in  the  night,  their  cries  as  the "
long 
first  to complete and set in  order the mythology and  legends of the Elder  
"     He  crawled away to the  right, seeking for a path round the mere. They  "
"Suddenly Gollum sat down and began to weep, a whistling and gurgling sound "
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.' 
     Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with 
"Clarissa Melior,4041373156362745,13-05-1989
"
      
"roof of the third and highest tier of the Tower: an open space, about twenty "
"again.  Two more followed,  and then a fourth. They were very  small to look "
"     And  so King Thjoden departed from his own realm, and mile  by mile the "
"     But Gandalf sprang up  the steps, and  the men fell  back from  him and "
"up the chase and turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned "
"####-and the shadow on the moon, though now it was not so crushing or compelling: "
"offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it again, "
"But take a morsel to eat now, a bit of the E lves' food; it may hearten you.' "
"had passed him by, only a yard to one side. "
"Hyman Baudet,4711157719513871,08-04-1980
"
"this evening, to  say no more. The story of that  Mr. Bilbo's  going off has "
"may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.' "
"     'Gilthoniel, A  Elbereth!' Sam  cried. For, why he  did  not know,  his "
""
don't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of  Orthanc  to beg  a  
"one side, he fled down the stair. "
"That is why I believe he once came from the mountains himself."" "
"responsible for him. I wish to goodness you had not lost him."" "
"     He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company  of "
Galadriel that Frodo bore glimmered and was lost. And the ship went out into 
"to  look stern and important. Frodo, however, was  silent  and looked rather  "
"Brita Gahagan,4041599583844554,26-03-1976
"
"Elisabetta Cheeld,4041376394391,24-05-1990
"
     as the Sun raised up her head. 
queer sounds by a river at night.' 
"Jeromy Densey,4041375858602518,01-03-1986
"
""
"     `May the  day not be too long delayed,' said Boromir. 'For though  I do "
"the river  the land  appeared flat and empty,  formless and vague, until far "
"by  the  dwarves, who  had  dug  it  from  the  heart  of  the mountain  long  ago,  it  took "
"####-Down the dwarves scrambled or jumped or dropped, eleven all in a heap, most "
don't suppose you would have done half as well yourselves in his place. Of course 
"took the Phial in  his left  hand,  and  with his right hand drew his sword. "
"wrong!  ' he cried. `I knew I  would. Now they've  got him, the  devils! the "
"     'I'll do as I choose and go as I please,' said Bilbo obstinately. "
"his  huge hide shield he  turned  Boromir's  sword  and  bore him backwards,  "
clear sight perceived her sorrow and unrest. 
"road, and man and beast must reach the end with strength to fight. A week it "
with elven-skill in the likeness of  a bird. Two elves clad in white steered 
"     'My dear Gandalf! Half a  minute!' cried Frodo, running out of the room "
     `How many are there?'  he  thought. `Thirty or forty  from the tower at 
"     He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. `There! '  he said, "
stay  the night; The Floating Log at  Frogmorton was a good inn. But as they  
"were grey and sad, and some  were afraid. With a sinking heart  he made  his "
it does not look  like coming true;  and anyway there will evidently have to 
"hood to you."" Which he did. "
"Dani Varfolomeev,4017951052604,19-12-1986
"
"again.  I don't  suppose  the magic  is  strong  enough  to hurt you,  if you  just  touch  a "
"rest, surely, and at the least eat a little?' "
"Zacharia Gerrie,4038067880137788,01-08-1980
"
and 
"""I  am Mr. Bilbo Baggins.  I  have  lost  the  dwarves  and  I  have  lost  the wizard, "
miles away. Frodo looked round  in horror. Dreadful as the Dead  Marshes had 
do not want to see that land.' 
"you  want to know, I felt as if I hadn't  got nothing on,  and I didn't like "
"with wonder, Frodo  and Sam went forward  and saw  that amidst the "
"All the same, I am not sure that  Treebea rd  is right: I  fancy he could  do "
"Audrye Whorf,4700493967955,13-02-1995
"
"laughter and caper, if any jest was made, or even  if Frodo  spoke kindly to "
"Corrine Pond-Jones,4041594950396,24-03-1977
"
     'Then  since we  must  look  for  fell deeds and  the  need  of all our 
"     'By your leave, lord!' said Pippin and turned and fled  in terror  from "
"     He rose and gazed out  eastward, shading his eyes, as if he  saw things "
to look in the  glass for his  torment by  Saruman.  That dark mind will  be 
     'Now indeed there is hope of victory!' said Jomer. 
"     `About the  food,' said Sam. 'How long's it going to take us to do this "
under the stars.  Nearer  at hand  a few lights twinkled  in the village  of 
"stirred  and  stood up,  and  it seemed that  he was  about to  speak and to "
hung  up  two  yellow  hoods  and  a  pale  green  one;  and  also  a  sky-blue one with  a 
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle. 
welcome 
     I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand. 
"Raddy Garforth,4017958023491,07-02-1996
"
"hill-sides from the streams and deep  meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in "
table; and with great speed food and vessels and  lights were set  in order. 
"and let  you be.  Boromir  will tell all, when he comes. When he comes,  say "
"     `He was the last,' said  Frodo, 'but Aragorn was forced to lead us.  He "
"First  he  unlocked  Balin's  door,  and  locked  it  again  carefully  as  soon  as  the "
"Valida Prinne,4041592551063,26-05-1999
"
"Lord  himself. Yet the  way of the  Ring  to  my heart is by pity, pity  for  "
"     'Come!'  said Aragorn. `If I am still to lead this Company, you must do "
"     'Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.' "
"however a removal might  fit in with the  designs of his wizardry, there was "
at all. We want to be let alone.  I  don't want a  whole  crowd o' strangers 
"loved it, and among many uses they  made of it ithildin , starmoon, which you "
"was the face  of one who has been assailed by a great fear  or anguish,  but "
"####-plain. Merry crawled on all fours like a dazed beast, and  such a horror was "
was 
     Then Sam played his last trick. With all his  strength  he  pulled away 
the trees above them began to drip. 
wizard's bristling brows.  
""
"that was called the Dimrill Stair. The sons of Elrond, Elladan and  Elrohir, "
comfort!' 
"have to be sure, but I'll wager there is good juice inside."" "
muster the courage to ask  one of the many questions he had meant to  ask at 
"given back. But if I may counsel you in the use  of your own, do not use  it "
"And when Lotho sent his Men they got no  change out of him. Tooks are lucky, "
"Tabatha Alsobrook,4017953986007,26-03-1999
"
     So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea. 
"their gait,  but not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat "
in 
chamber. 
"     'Boromir was satisfied of that claim,' said Frodo. `Indeed, if  Boromir "
axe fall he covered his face. 
"time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A "
"of  ancient stone, and within them was a lofty  tower. Men said that  in the "
"got  at them,  in spite of all that I could do, and  they took  up with him. "
"The earth was much nearer, and below  them were  trees  that  looked  like oaks and "
"the  excitement  of  the  dwarves,  or  how  they  praised  him  and  patted  him  on  the "
Indeed I alone can aid you now.' 
taught them not to carry torches.' 
"and children's stories at home, if I want to.' "
sank back into gloom. 
"expect we shall all wish our packs heavier, when the food begins to run short."" "
"     'No,' said Faramir, looking into her face. 'It was but a picture in the "
"Goldia Mapam,4041595099409,25-07-1987
"
 
"Erhart Rossbrooke,4041371105600538,19-01-2001
"
"moonlight. The tallest was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. "
pierced by the sudden keenness  of the glance. `If  I understand aright  all 
"'Fly, you fools!  ' he cried, and was gone. "
"consider  their  case. So grim had Thorin become, that even if they had wished, the "
"short for  a  full-sized  orc,  too long for  Frodo  and heavy. About it  he "
island-shores that really  are the  sides  of a mountain rising  out of deep 
     'You had better do something quick!' whispered Strider in his ear. 
and flying smoke was in the air.  
"     'Yes,  I wish that indeed,' said Denethor. 'For Boromir was loyal to me "
"Jilly Ecles,4041590538138,26-08-1989
"
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the 
"####-the middle of  the day,  in some  hollow of the land,  or  hidden under  the "
"places,  dread  came  over him. His hands were cold  and his  brow  damp. He "
whispers. The other had  gone down to take up  his watch on one of the lower  
Gondolin hunted them in the hills or did battle before their walls. They had called 
"burning out, and the smouldering  hills were  fading, while ash-grey evening "
"very far  before Pippin came  running back,  fol lowed  by Merry.  They  both "
"that would have been better left quiet.  Pray, do nothing of the kind again!  "
"`Well, well!'  he said. `If only  they all take such a  dislike to me and my "
doorway into a black and empty space. There  was  a great draught of  warmer  
"brought  out  of  the  Elf-country. Made  by Galadriel herself, too,  maybe. "
"     'The words were not the  doom of Minas Tir ith,' said Aragorn. `But doom "
"slopes  of the  hill, and came in a  little while to the  edge of the  Road. "
     'How do you know that?' said Jomer. 
hoard  than  the dwarves did. Long before  the dwarves were  tired of examining  the 
"hounds on  a scent, it  was  said, but they could  also climb.  He drew  out "
"Tawsha Waterworth,4017958129520344,05-02-1978
"
"For so he is, a lord among men,  the greatest that  now is. But when he gave  "
     'I am  no longer  young even  in the  reckoning of  Men of the  Ancient 
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing 
length they came to the crown of the hill. There stood a high platform above 
####-<h4>Chapter 4.</h4> <br> Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit 
"Cesar Garstan,4041372156421246,03-07-1998
"
and got his feet firmly planted; then suddenly he drove his legs against the 
"learned  that  the  Elvenking  had  turned  aside  to  the  Lake,  and  they  still  had  a "
"had  freed  the  Lonely  Mountain,  and  elves  and  men  on  either  side  of  the  valley "
"drew his bow-string to his ear. The dragon was circling back, flying low, and as he "
"sprawling briars and many fallen  stones, they  moved forward all  together.  "
"will make shift  to tread the path behind  us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will "
"heard, and it would have seemed to him only that he saw grey figures, carved "
"     'I parted with them in  the morning two days ago,' said Faramir. 'It is "
fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled.  But they had not gone far on  
cellars.  Frodo  also had a  tussle  with young Sancho  Proudfoot  (old  Odo 
"     And when he  could labour no  more,  he cast his  cloak  about him, and "
"Elysia Mathias,4017953719359039,21-10-1981
"
"in his  wavering hand, but they did not see it. Even as  he came panting up, "
"think. He has changed; but  we have not had a chance to see  how  much, yet. "
"came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than "
"     'I  used to  be  anxious  when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but when  it "
"and  some were  already beginning to eat into  the walls,  like rabbits in a  "
"""Moon-letters  are  rune-letters,  but  you  cannot  see  them,""  said  Elrond,  ""not "
"     'Yes,  it  is Elves,' said  Frodo. 'One can meet them sometimes  in the "
"Blinny McKane,4017950005785,24-03-2000
"
are astray; for out of  Harrowdale no road  runs east or south; and  you had 
""
"Sanford Leiden,4041377089695097,27-06-1981
"
"Amalee Chaudhry,4041370576001,15-01-2000
"
"that was so near, and his grovelling  promise made half in the fear of  cold "
cowering. The same warning fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of 
"     And so Merry was sent to Faramir, and while that day lasted they talked "
"to see as it  caught  the sunlight, rising  from a thicket above him. With a  "
"Vale, then  perils he will have. I, too, despaired at  last,  and I began my "
the road-builders of old had cut the rock sheer for many fathoms above their  
"while and had such a breakfast as they could, chiefly cram and water. (If you want "
would not wish to see what the Stone of Minas Tirith would show you. But the 
"     'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry,  root, and herb; and "
"     'Quite  capable,'  said Saruman, 'and more  than a little. You  made me "
     `Never before has any voice dared to utter the  words of that tongue in 
"waking life, though it  had often  troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he "
"Emmery Tripe,4041378042553167,13-05-1996
"
"bore him, shining,  unveiled  once  more, a light starting from his upraised "
eyrie at night! 
"     When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay; "
"Margaux Cathee,4041591708406153,17-07-1996
"
     for into darkness fell his star 
"""Have  you  thoroughly  explored  it?""  said  the wizard, who  knew  that  caves  up "
"lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked  the same  and "
"island  of the Tindrock,  that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its  arms "
"ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!' "
flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle-earth. The  stars  fainted 
and prolonged. The  purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout 
"     'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow  that we had, "
"bit? We're going that way now, as straight as we can make it.' He pointed to  "
"smiths in  the Elder  Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs "
and the garrison upon the outer wall was already in many places cut off from 
"crossing and interwoven boughs. As  the old Ent approached, the trees lifted "
it seemed to him that  he had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of 
"     But their master's been and drowned his wits, "
####-listening in vain. 
"would my heart have been, for all our victory at the  havens, if Legolas had "
"     In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his  left, "
""
"that  day  in Bilbo's  dining-room  that  seemed  so  long ago,  if you remember—, and "
"there were patches of sunlight on its brown sides, and behind its shoulders the tips "
"robed all in white, and four small figures that many men marvelled to see. "
mountains 
"soon reached them; too soon for  Merry. Wild cries broke out, and  there was "
"the ending of the day, or the  end maybe of all the world of  light. And out "
and bear it unto good fortune!' 
"     `Then  it  belongs to  you,  and not to  me  at all!'  cried  Frodo  in "
"Adriena Shimwell,4041370270274,06-09-1995
"
to spy  out the secrets of the  Naith. Few indeed  are permitted even to set 
"had ordered them to make haste. Suddenly the torches stopped, and the hobbit had "
"Serge Cowins,4017955901999589,07-09-1989
"
"But I honour his memory,  for he was very  valiant.  He died to save  us, my "
"""messenger of Mordor"". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?' "
"Lake. After that the trouble would begin."" "
"     Legolas watched  them for a while with a smile upon his lips,  and then "
     Sing hey! for the bath at close of day 
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes.' 
     'Work of the Enemy!' said Gandalf. 'Such  deeds he loves: friend at war 
"suddenly Sam laughed, for heart's ease not for jest. They followed a  stream "
"     No  hours  so dark had  Pippin known, not  even in the clutches  of the "
"and there Pippin,  hardly noticed, stood behind  the  chair of Denethor  and "
"you. You could see them, and they could see you. ' "
be searched or plundered: those are my orders.' 
"soon  'as  possible  just  then,  and  would  not  stay.  On  they  all  went,  leading  their "
"Rodie Windibank,4041590842431,09-02-1980
"
indeed  hardly  tight  enough. Sam was gentler than his words.  'What's  the 
"sight: The  lands opened wide  about him,  filled with  the waters of  the  river which "
"table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him. "
over  the fire.  But  it was not the  trolls that  had filled the  Elf  with 
"Deena Shorten,4723404316271255,31-03-1987
"
"difference,  for  even Bilbo with  the  use  of  his  eyes  could  not  see where  they were "
"days, and gold was probably getting scarce up there, with the dwarves flying south "
"""Good  morning!""  said  Bilbo,  and  he  meant  it.  The  sun  was  shining,  and  the "
"was  cold  and  wet.  In  the  Lone-lands  they  had  to  camp  when  they  could,  but  at "
"     'But  the Rohirrim  made a  great burning here yesterday,'  said Gimli, "
"     And Gondolin, who now beyond "
"shaft  was shot;  their swords were notched, and their shields  were  riven. "
the least reward that you shall have is that  the memory of Lothlurien shall 
"     He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak wrapped it  "
"Giorgio Rosa,4041597182911691,07-05-1978
"
""
"were miserably delayed  in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee,  my dear hobbit  -- "
bottom of  the gorge they  found that evening had fallen in the deep places.  
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the North.  
"still we rode on, and  Ciril and Ringlu we crossed; and on  the third day we "
it was no  good trusting those little fools. Some of our chaps ought to have 
"Eda Reynoollds,4041599584219780,04-05-1994
"
all  the  advice  I  can  give  you.  Beyond  the  edge  of  the  forest  I  cannot  help  you 
"""Nothing  can  escape  Smaug  once  he  sees  it.  Here  we  are  and  here  we  shall "
therefore  legendary).  That  is  why  I  settled  on  burglary-especially  when  I 
     Pippin  remained behind. 'Was  there  ever any one like him?'  he said. 
"     From all his policies and  webs of  fear  and treachery, from  all  his "
"Greggory Arkle,4041590393179,06-12-1993
"
"bank, but it was not much good. "
"a long  arm, and  lifted him out  of the saddle. His horse bolted in terror, "
"think over, but  I'll put that off until tomorrow. I'm  for bed, and I've no "
"Aragorn. But now we wish to see  our friends. Meriadoc and Peregrin, who are "
you  hear them? They are not for all  ears.  I bid you come out  before your 
and the hobbits followed more slowly. 
"Kial Sim,4041375487604778,17-05-1981
"
time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin could see that 
beast.' He sighed. 
"Tabbi Steptoe,4017958759696406,28-07-1976
"
"     And at last Bergil came running in, and he bore six  leaves in a cloth. "
"     'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My city "
"BUSINESS. Even those  who had, or  pretended  to  have  Party  Business were "
"     As he gazed at it  suddenly Sam understood, almost  with a shock,  that "
Marshal Of the Mark. In Jomer  there  is little trust. Few men would be left  
"though I have tried to  bear his part, I do not know what design or hope  he "
'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of  death 
     It was  as he said; and Pippin soon  found himself  arrayed in  strange 
"     over death, over dread, over doom lifted "
     Frodo heard  the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the 
     He heard there oft the flying sound 
"Kristin Tallis,4041372266507462,27-05-1999
"
they had breakfasted. Sam leapt to his feet. Not least from  his own feeling 
     'So it has been  for many lives of men. But  the  Lords of Minas Tirith 
     'What are they wanted for?'  asked  several voices. 'Why alive? Do they 
our own day.  But even the D®nedain of  Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits 
"eastward  into  the  great Shadow, but the Mountain  now  loomed  upon their "
"     When  Sam  got back  he found the  whole village roused. Already, apart  "
your choice.' 
"there, if ever you return?' "
"these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to  the "
"     `We must reach  the doors before sunset,' said Gandalf,  'or I  fear we "
This you know in your heart.' 
"     '""Well, he has gone in,"" he said when he returned. ""I saw  him crawling "
"are  glad  to  cheat  the  goblins  of  their  sport,  and  glad  to  repay  our  thanks  to  you, "
not recapture the Arkenstone and withhold the share of the reward. 
"treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close "
"Cornie Blanpein,4017950632992,03-09-1996
"
"goods south-away,  and  others  to stay. And  more came.  And before we knew "
     'That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused before; 
"to trunk, like a rabbit that has lost its hole and has a dog after it. "
     Nothing  further  happened  that  night.  The next morning  dawned even  
"Hall; and Aldor brother of Baldor the hapless;  and Frja, and  Frjawine, and "
     'Are we rested? Have we had beautiful sleep?' he said. 'Let's go!' 
""
"Noelani Townsend,4041592081871,30-06-1975
"
"on  the hearth,  and in front of it  were some low  and comfortable  chairs.  "
"In the meanwhile, however, Bullroarer's gentler descendant was reviving in the "
"Mountain!""  they  cried,  and  everywhere  windows  were  opening  and  feet  were "
spy-work for the Chief and his Men.' 
     `Hush! ' whispered Frodo. `I thought I heard voices.' 
"known."" "
"them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of  some long root thrust out by "
     They  cast  themselves  down  in  the  heather  a  few  yards  from the 
surprise one day to overhear some of the guards talking and to learn that there was 
"Hyatt Brabyn,4017950588270354,24-02-1991
"
"song  inside, and many  cheerful voices  joined loudly in the  chorus.  They "
"     'I cannot answer  that now,' said Gandalf. 'Yet  my heart guessed  that "
"Maye Verma,4041374294171,04-09-1995
"
"for realms between Isen and Greyflood, or  along the shore lands south of the  "
""
 
Aragorn bruised two leaves of athelas and cast them into steaming water; and 
"denser. There,  there were airs moving,  and echoes,  and a sense  of space. "
"to know what  all this is  about,  and  what a Bucklander  like you is doing "
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a  
"ought to he, or I'm a dwarf.' "
Elvenhome and will ever be. Have you no such custom at meat? ' 
the twilit hall of the Burg. 'To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the 
"     A tall man entered, and Merry choked back a cry; for a moment it seemed "
"     `Must get up, yes  they must!'  he  said. 'Long ways to go still, south "
"     When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open, "
flight would land them. 
"""S-s-s-s-s,""  hissed  Gollum.  ""It  must  give  us  three  guesseses,  my  preciouss, "
"northwards, and passed over the borders of Dunland. The Dunlendings fled and "
"Eziechiele Laird,4243097809679,17-04-1991
"
"     The wind was in his flowing hair, "
"Kati Ivankovic,4468982990744,26-03-1997
"
remained seated in silence.  Strider was watching the moonlight on  the hill 
"Bartel Faustin,4017958157240526,18-12-1980
"
"do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the  Blessed  Realm "
it was to watch. 
     Farewell we call to hearth and hall! 
"no beautiful things, but they make many clever ones. They can tunnel and mine as "
arrows  from  their  bows.  None  seemed  to  find  their  mark.  The  deer  turned  and 
slow 
"he'll  settle  down  and  grow some  hobbit-sense,'  they said. And  to  all "
"particular  reasons  for  being  grateful  to  him.  There  it  is:  dwarves  are  not  heroes, "
"     'Wait a minute!'  cried  Sam, struck by an idea suggested by  firewood. "
"Nikita Freezor,4017956378316141,03-08-1978
"
pillars moulded out of luminous stone. 
"his left. An arrow came whistling out of the gloom: it was aimed with skill, "
and all  the time they were  carried nearer and  nearer to the eastern bank. 
"     It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their "
     Day  was waning. In  the last  rays  of the  sun  the Riders  cast long 
"     Frodo  was waiting on the step, smiling, but  looking rather  tired and "
all was over men returned  and  made a fire there  and burned the carcase of 
""
"thought that they beheld an old weary hobbit, shrunken by the years that had "
"these parts at times. Too near the River,' he said, shaking his  head.  'But "
"     `We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,' said Aragorn, `but that is "
"Kenny Prott,4041593701838812,10-02-1981
"
"     'Then  tell  u s  some other tale of  the old days,' begged Sam; 'a tale "
"the light of  day.  But you  comfort me, Gimli, and I  am  glad  to have you  "
"something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon  him. He sprang  up "
"they  rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas  halted and looked back "
turned a  corner opening on the wide place behind  the City Gate. He stopped 
"were  sheltering  under  a  hanging  rock  for  the  night,  and  he  lay  beneath  a  blanket "
"by waiting until his enemies are secure,  as we have done. Also we could not  "
they saw that the path was blocked behind them. 
     Frodo welcomed  his old friend with  surprise  and great delight.  They 
"     'Worms  or beetles or something slimy out of holes,' thought Sam. 'Brr! "
""
"But the  Forest is queer. Everything in it  is very  much more  alive,  more "
the Shadow into which you go!' 
"""String,  or  nothing!""  shrieked  Gollum,  which  was  not  quite  fair-working  in "
looked  up at the rock -wall with its rough  steps leading to the high shelf.  
"and  for long she  spoke no more, while all sat silent. 'But, Aragorn,'  she "
"have seldom even heard of the king round here, and the less inquisitive you are as "
"south of them. They could, if they had known the lands, with some delay have "
"Bobbee Agar,4041597101006995,25-05-1995
"
you  have  no  thought  for  the  sorrow  and misery  of  his  people.  They  aided  you  in 
"crawl ed  out,  and as  for  that worm-creature of his,  he was  like  a pale "
Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host  of foes coming  out of 
"great speed. Silent they were, but there was a gleam in  their eyes. In  the "
"handkerchief-no!  not  a  single  one  of  his own had  survived, he had borrowed  this "
"no further, though  they gazed in wonder  at the hobbit that sat before  him "
seas of foam. 
####-the day when he  had  lit  his little  fire under  the sunny bank; and for a  
"again, as fast as he could trot, at the end of the line, down more dark passages with "
"""What's a burrahobbit got to do with my pocket, anyways?"" said William. "
back 
came to L®thien upon the green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight 
that 
"     With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men, "
"to be clear cold water, yet it went to  their hearts like  wi ne and set free "
"     Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and had  been "
been sent ahead. Some  had not returned.  Others hastening back had reported 
Bilbo  saw  that  the moment  had  come  when  he must  do  something.  He  could 
 
"story  of  the  ending  of  the  Riddle  Game,  as  it  was  eventually  revealed  (under "
Butterbur and  Nob  came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid.  There 
to  his liking. Now  I  must go and wash myself clean  of the slime. I'll be 
"""Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!""? No, indeed! He said: ""Get up, "
had  a feeling  that  it  was time he went back to the Shire. Sam shared it. 
     Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.'  
"him, as if his  blue mantle was on ly a  cloud over sunshine; and at the four "
"and floated on the  rippling stream.  The air was very bright and still, and "
"seemed to grow  strong: it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber  "
him again.  He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet that neither  
"Bilbo  sat  on  a  stool  at  the  fireside,  nibbling  at  a  biscuit  (his  appetite  was  quite "
north lies our road between down and fen when day returns.' 
of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for your other question: do you 
"that they were drawing near to the end of their journey, and that it might be a very "
"edge of  the wood, there was a mound. It was newly raised: the raw earth was "
"Claybourne Briers,4041376539383,19-01-1986
"
"was hidden. They had brought picks and tools of many sorts from Lake-town, and "
long in dark thought.' 
"Gaspar Meadows,4017955047919814,19-10-1983
"
odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill 
not seen the  strangers in all  their gear before gaped with wonder at them: 
While hammers fell like ringing bells 
personal names out of the past. 
"hand  back. and  set it to find another thing, a thing lying hidden near his "
"glad to have you about for a bit. You see, we're not used to  such troubles; "
delay. But you must not delay too long.' 
"Selma Malicki,4017951019066,29-11-1980
"
"him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in  the "
"Zaccaria Ricioppo,4017957900301,16-07-1996
"
one ear. 
There was once more a  tremendous excitement and enthusiasm. But  the grim-
"across  the lighter  space between two trees, and then halt. It looked  like "
"made  over  comfortable,  perhaps  – otherwise we might have had  longer warnings "
"Cord Britt,4041593999675,06-02-1975
"
 
lightning   far  away  across  Rohan.  Every  now  and  then  we  could  see 
end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the 
""
"could now see their way: in front the road sloped down swiftly, and some way "
     'Why are there so few  when  you  have  lived in this country so long?' 
and their elusiveness  is due  solely to a professional skill  that heredity 
a weight.' 
     That none have seen but we alone. 
"     'No,' said Legolas. 'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our "
     'The Lord  does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave 
"tunnels. They were not made by Durin's  folk, Gimli  son of   Gluin. Far, far "
courtyard into the house. 
"####-Mean  folk shall rule  the last remnant of the Kings of Men, lurking in  the "
     Gandalf  remained for a  while  staring  after  him  into the darkness. 
"leisurely sort of way, just to amuse himself. "
half covered with ragged dry  leaves that have never fallen. Untidy. I can't  
"Halfling that was  named,  doubtless you brought this thing, whatever it may "
"     `We have not decided our course,' said Aragorn. 'Beyond Lothlurien I do "
"of bodies.  And when  I heaved that  great  carcase off you, I made sure you  "
"Long  ere day the masted ships  hoisted sail; and our speed grew, until dawn "
     So  great was the power that Saruman  exerted in this  last effort that 
"Edna Musker,4041591383591,17-07-2001
"
"Tobit Caville,4041375966090,27-03-1978
"
Pippin saw then that they had been standing in alcoves on either side of the 
ilexes of  huge girth stood  dark  and solemn in  wide glades with  here and 
"     Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!'  "
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the 
leaves.  For  the  moment  there  was no  whispering  or movement  among the 
"where  the  chief peril  lay!  Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we  could not "
"came. 'I   wish  old  Tom was near us  now!' he  thought.  Then  as he stood, "
     'Master!' cried Sam. 
"Becka Bagnell,4017956042931,08-09-1997
"
Down the swift dark stream you go 
and if  he would not really rather have stayed there in peace-all in a flash 
own  little prints  and Merry's  were overwhelmed by  the  trampling of  the 
come and deal with you. D'you hear?' 
him  sword to sword.  And over  the  wide fields the keen-eyed Riders hunted 
Field  of Celebrant they  destroyed our enemies that had seized our northern 
silent. 
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit  still without 
"     'And now our fates are  woven together,' said Aragorn. 'And yet,  alas!  "
still dwell here to deal with it.' 
"     'You give the choice to an ill chooser,' said Aragorn. 'Since we passed "
forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years  longer for  
"borders  of  a  great  brown  reed-thicket. There was  a   deep silence, only "
"     For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as he faced Gandalf, and "
"chance to cry out, for at that moment many things happened. "
deal out death in judgement.  For  even the very wise cannot see all ends. I 
""
"     From  Deeping-coomb  they rode to Isengard,  and saw  how the Ents  had "
     Hart horn-crowned; hawk is swiftest 
"barrow  for the last  time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still, "
"     It was not very long, though fear made it seem an hour at least, before "
anything on a journey that I'd have been less sorry to lose  on the way. But 
     'And our friends?' 
"Nine-fingered Frodo and the Ring of Doom? And then everyone  will hush, like "
"     'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would "
"tale."" "
"Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against him. None may live "
The  hiss  was  close  behind  him.  He  turned  now  and  saw  Gollum's  eyes  like 
"Byrom Jados,4041598543577,29-08-1982
"
Sackville-Bagginses. 
"     The  king and all his company  sat silent on  their horses, marvelling, "
"     'Stay!  Stay!'  cried Gandalf,  springing  forward  to the stone  stair "
he had  stolen; and  the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the  Enemy  was 
Gandalf's saddlebow.' 
"Mirabella Breakspear,4041590379244,17-06-1975
"
and  was  pushed  over  into  the  cold  water  some  feet  below.  Some  were  barrels 
"Alfy Bowring,4017959398090,28-12-1982
"
"guessing, they  seemed. Great  trailing  beards of lichen  hung  from  them, "
times. 
"often open,  for a good deal of  traffic went out and  in by  the water-gate. If anyone "
also felt the cold touch of steel against his skin. 
 
"     'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that  letter  at once, "
"     'Dwarf-coat,  elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from the "
"     We still remember, we who dwell "
"Tirith knows more than he sets in his message? For we are already at war, as "
"water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to manage here."" "
"more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an  'accident' "
####-your weapons! Then  go  back twenty paces and sit down. Any who try to 
made  in Gondolin for  the goblin-wars of which so many songs had sung; and also 
     Frodo  sat  down  beside  Sam and began  to eat. 'Wha t is the  plan for  
"     'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf. 'There was a darkness over the "
"     The vanguard passed on through the ruins  of  Old Gondor, and  over the "
"crept back over the western  heights, long after day had opened in the lands "
"again,  and now he seemed  plainly to know the hard  answer: see it through. "
"####-polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet "
"fail, and you  will come to a barren country. There the River flows in stony "
     But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly  eyes. Their  
and you must pardon my foolishness.' 
"Rania Real,4041599551927126,02-08-1993
"
"Sherwood Gouthier,4621309742962,30-08-1997
"
not  from the beginning: said that if anyone was going to play the chief  at 
to its height. 
great stones of it were set with such  skill that no foothold could be found 
"its publication in 1937; but I did not go  on with this sequel, for I wished "
"####-hasten away, and he that must remain.' "
treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn 
"Angel Montier,4629641941366,09-05-1997
"
     'Put up your weapons!' shouted Ugl®k. 'And let's have no more nonsense! 
will  bear  you away with a  speed that even  the black steeds of  the enemy 
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him. 
"     `Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour  is long passed. The morning is  wearing "
"through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath "
"fattest hobbit  in the Westfarthing, had  been buried in chalk, and came out "
"Millard Younger,4017950074112,03-09-1979
"
moon shone in your hair.' 
"Thorndike Groucock,4041595764796,20-05-2001
"
"     Far behind the  battle the  River had been swiftly bridged, and all day "
"Frodo. But  if you mean ""known about this ring"", well,  I still do not know,  "
answered Aragorn.  'With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith. My errand was to 
"things, worse things live  there too. The road climbs right under the shadow  "
suddenly plucking up courage. He  had noted that Faramir seemed  to refer to 
"""Tomorrow begins the last week of Autumn,"" said Thorin one day.  "
perhaps the Breelanders.' 
 
     But the noise grew closer. `They are  coming!' cried Damrod. `See! Some 
that remained of her money and of Lotho's for him to use in helping  hobbits 
`Leave one! 'he said. `We'll need it. But you  can't come like  this without 
 
The river loops suddenly east across Dale in front of the ruined town. At that point 
"Ernie Danielsohn,4017955931660649,15-04-1990
"
"His head and beard wagged  this way and  that as he looked for the stones, and "
A Thief in the Night 
"Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north  the broken peaks and barren  ridges "
flowed beneath his high helm was  like  snow; and  many marvelled a t him and 
"that you are gone. Leave a  message for me here,  if you  pass through Bree. "
young hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of 
"Augustina Hardi,4041597342070,20-03-1991
"
"sizes  too.  I  should  say  there  were  little  bears,  large  bears,  ordinary  bears,  and "
"wretched  creature as  he  now  began  to  move again,  still whispering and "
fit the simple tune. 
and bruised where he had been hurled against the  wall. While the others set  
"Demetre Mercer,4405650792434032,05-04-1992
"
"joined the Forest River some way further to the east, beyond the steep slope out of "
     He saw the elven-flowers spring 
     He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long -fingered hand to  each 
 
"     'Once again I thank you, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn of  the woods,'  said  Thjoden.  "
eastern  end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down the  centre stalked a  
Tower.' 
had  yet come upon the beer  or the victuals at The Pony at any rate. 'Now I 
"Mordor.  For yet another weapon, swifter than hunger,  the Lord of the  Dark "
"     But in the meantime, the general opinion in the  neighbourhood was that "
"head  with  Glamdring,  and  Thorin Was  stabbing  here  there  and  everywhere  with "
     'Truly!' said Legolas. 'That I have known since first we came down from 
"Willie Yellowlea,4587246906566,17-03-1993
"
"Em Beetham,4017953869519416,22-07-1976
"
"hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly "
"Ellen Highnam,4041377413169710,25-07-1997
"
"dealings with someone  in  the Shire, I  guess. Wormtongues may  be found in "
`and  yet we come  no  nearer. What  strength have we for the finding of the 
"     Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. `I  know,'  he said. 'But often I "
"Hanson Prator,4041596972753933,18-08-1992
"
other  side  of  them  to  the  Lonely Mountain  in  the  East Where  Smaug  lies on our 
"""That I never did!"" said Tom. ""It was you."" "
####-steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea. They came upon many 
faintly;  but  on either side there arose  walls of impenetrable gloom; they 
sounded  disquietingly  like signals of  some  sort;  but after a  while the 
"Jarret Ellery,4676297876743,31-07-1982
"
"     'No,  no! Sam, you  old ass! ' said Frodo.  `You'll kill  yourself  for  "
"####-undercuts,  and  the  different  arts,  devices  and  stratagems  by which  they  had  been "
"Quintin Springell,4041373045876772,04-08-1987
"
"the wood, wide  in places  and open  above, though  every  now and again the "
"There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas  the Elf, and Erkenbrand "
"     'Heed the words! ' said the other  Elves. 'These boats are light-built, "
"Drucy Delap,4017956253132,18-07-1987
"
"none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no "
"sighed. I don't know what river it was, a rushing red one, swollen with the rains of "
"     'They are,' said Frodo.  'Do you like  them still,  now  you have had a  "
"Nicolina Helliwell,4041599800125522,28-04-1999
"
you 
steeds of old  has returned. None  such shall  return again. And  to you  my 
"     'Elrond  commanded it,' answered  Gandalf. `The river of this valley is "
"Bev Hadcock,4881596958636,20-12-2001
"
"Sam knew that, dead  or alive, Frodo would most likely be found in a chamber  "
"York Smitton,4041598337996,17-10-1981
"
we  can  come  into  Wilderland  beyond.  And  it  is  a  deal  of  a  way  even  from  the 
"In consequence, though it happily cost very few lives, it has a  chapter  to "
"Shoshanna Djordjevic,4017955578844,01-05-1999
"
"whether because some magic kept it clear, or for what other reason they could not "
     `Dear Bilbo!' said Frodo sleepily. `I wonder where he is. I wish he was 
"Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example,  putting their "
"     But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as  if a hole had "
"     'Where such  laws hold,'  said  Gandalf, 'it is  also  the  custom  for  "
"Rheta Pengilley,4041592024674631,23-09-2001
"
"Brigham Binder,4041373638690705,05-08-1983
"
"trees and their thoughts, which were often dark and strange, and filled with "
"     And  in that moment all the trumpets  were  blown, and the King Elessar  "
"yet  of that either. Master  Elrond will summon us all ere long,  I believe, "
of beard or of a hood. 
"or you'll land in trouble  too big for you,' I says  to him. And I might say "
"killed the Great Goblin and a great many others besides, and they had all escaped, "
     Under the first shadows of night they started  out on the next stage of 
""
"grieves  me, and  my strength  is  lessened by it; but now  I must take  the "
"     'I will,' said Thjoden. 'And let food for my guests be set on the board "
dark. 
"jumped  out  of  his  chair,  and  with  a  bound took  a  candle  from  the "
"     `Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam. "
"Maxie Brugden,4041379705921774,24-07-1979
"
"Katharine Burg,4041370886327,18-02-1996
"
"more kingly,  beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet  by a sense other than "
"tall, and seemed to be one of the  younger Ents;  he had smooth shining skin "
grass. 
went away.' 
"Soon  another  eagle  flew  up.  ""The  Lord  of  the  Eagles  bids  you  to  bring  your "
"     He looked at Frodo and smiled. 'Very well,' he said. 'I think that will "
"and poised upon their  huge hinges, posts of  steel driven  into the  living "
####-poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to  Boromir? Why  didn't the 
of the  Brandywine Bridge in  broad daylight. An old  man was driving it all  
"forest allowed, following  the line of the  running  stream, westward and up "
####- 
     as splashing Hot Water with my feet! 
"that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are "
was  an evil choice. Which way should  he choose? And if both  led to terror  
"The Worm of Dread is slain and dead, "
"wonder"",  and things like that.  And pretending that you had come to the end  "
ready for you. He will  bear you as swift as any horse by the  roads that we 
"Dorry Daynter,4711095570469,11-08-1989
"
don't belong here; you're no Baggins  - you - you're a Brandybuck!' 
"     'Man!' cried Pippin,  now  thoroughly roused.  'Man! Indeed not! I am a  "
claw of  Mordor. Cruel  and cold! Even if your war on me was just as  it was 
give an account of yourselves to us first.' 
a cave or a hole dug  somewhere near  to hide  from  the  sun  in? We must  look  into 
floor looking rather surprised. 
them  low  like  the  tables for  the convenience of  the wonderful animals  that waited 
"     'Don't  waste any more words  on  the  fool, Sam!' said Frodo. 'I  hope "
"get away from these hills! I hate them. I feel all naked on  the  east side, "
"figure wheel into the circle of his  sight, and hover, and  then wheel  away "
South last night - and that was strange enough to  begin with. Then there's a  
"evil, that  may be profitable,  and yet it may not. Seeing is both good  and "
"beasts drew it,  Orcs surrounded  it, and  behind  walked mountain-trolls to "
"Satisfied  at last, he threw back  his head and let out a  horrible gurgling "
"and fern. It was fresh,  and sweet-scented, and warm. The lights died  down, "
"not tell. Its worth was  ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price; "
"since his servants have pursued it  almost to our  door, he  soon will know, "
to keep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind  of trouble. Perhaps you  
""
many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes  full of 
"""We  did  not  attack  them,""  answered  Thorin;  ""we  came  to  beg,  because  we "
"see it."" But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton "
"came close behind, stooping, often using their hands even as he  did. 'Three "
"delay  you, to  prevent  your full strength being gathered.  He  was crafty: "
bewildered.  But  amidst  all  these  wonders  he  returned  always  to  his 
     The company turned then away from the  Coomb and from the wood and 
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.' 
"could not be altogether hid. So  they  too had gathered  in great numbers, under  the "
"we have sick comrades. Now make haste and  let us have no more words, or your "
""
"carry  off  while  we  are  alive.  If  you  would  earn  our  thanks  still  more,  bring  us "
"swarm  up.  They  found  them  as  quick  as  ever  they  could,  you  can  guess;  and  up "
"And Saruman? But great though his lore may be,  it  must have a source. What "
"making fun of us. Fifteen birds in five fir-trees…"" "
"them, even as they passed between the lines of ancient stones and so came to "
"healing hands. (The hands  of the king are  the  hands of a healer(, I said; "
"Issy Aizikov,4227641272994013,02-01-1978
"
"     'Come, you shall sit  behind me, friend  Gimli, said Legolas.  Then all "
"Man  gasped, stared for a  moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking "
"end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their "
""
"Nothing  they  could  say  would  stop  him;  so  an  escort  was  provided  for  him, "
"     'At the  end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was  on "
"folk again, and that's a fact: going  off into the Wild with  that  Strider, "
     'Ere  that dark day ended none of the  enemy were left to resist us all 
     And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor. 
     They went  out and seated themselves  upon the piled stones before  the 
"     'It is the will of Thjoden King that  none should enter his gates, save "
to  or jest with. Perhaps  I could  really join your  company?  Are  you the  
     For their defence in the  night the Company  climbed to the  top of the 
"outpaced it. After  him thundered the knights of his house,  but he was ever  "
"lifted it carefully, but the leaves crackled and broke as he laid it  on the "
elanor  that  glinted  in the sun.  The lawn ran  out  into a narrow  tongue 
"so far east under the shadow of yonder --,' he pointed and said no name. 'But "
their  race  for  the  dwarves  had  been  rekindled  to  fury. Messengers  had  passed  to 
"men out  of  far-away,'  he waved a  short gnarled  arm  eastward,  'sit  on "
"     'Maybe not, Sam,' said Frodo; 'but  it's like things  are in the world. "
"everything  was made ready, and that he himself was not forgotten. A  little "
"string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent. "
"Frodo's head,  drowned deep in  sleep; upon his white  forehead lay  one  of "
"Chiquita Woolvin,4546762022569139,10-05-1981
"
"Bennett Du Plantier,4017951647513008,22-05-1979
"
"stiff  perhaps,  but  he  meant  it  kindly.  And  what  would  you  do,  if  an  uninvited "
"that's loose!' And with that he raced  round   the last corner, only to  find "
while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening  
long miles further our feet  have walked. The land and the weather  will  be 
Maggot? In your duck-pond?' 
"Shelba Shortall,4041372759282680,05-07-1984
"
"brought news,  some of  which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs  had  been "
 
"of  course, the  king did say that I was to sit by  him when  he came to his "
"worm!""  he  squeaked  aloud.  ""Stop  playing  hide-and-seek!  Give  me  a  light,  and "
####-Old  Odo Proudfoot  removed his feet from the table and stamped. Then  there 
"His  Ring was  lost  but  not  unmade. The Dark  Tower  was broken,  but its "
"don't  know where  he  came  from,  nor who  or what  he was. He was Gollum  — as "
"Bilbo, who  had always been rather cracked, had at  last gone quite mad, and  "
"Heloise Crunkhurn,4041375566239,20-10-1981
"
"Then he spurred  his great  horse right  at me, and I jumped  out of the way "
came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there 
only one gate. 
almost forgotten what he looked like. He had been away over The Hill and across 
"beards;  and  each  of  them  carried  a  bag  of  tools  and  a  spade.  In  they  hopped,  as "
"all the sky, and the light through the windows fell on the grey faces of the  "
"     And then Beregond, perceiving the mercy  and justice  of the  King, was "
come late you'll get grass and rain-water!' 
"the night-guards were  summoned to their dungeons and  deep  halls, and  the "
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we. 
things to think about.' 
"     Pippin afterwards recalled little o f either food or drink, for his mind "
"Adel Hollebon,4041375120867709,30-03-1993
"
"then with a  hissing breath he spat before the king's feet, and  darting  to "
"     'Master, master!' cried Sam. He was close behind,  his own  sword drawn "
trust in the strength and truth of Men.' 
without your  leave. We might  do  some things together. I don't  know about 
"became  a  favourite  saying  of  his  later,  and  passed  into  a  proverb.  ""You  aren't "
would have guessed. Bilbo was astonished. The only path was marked with white 
"two, as you might say.' "
there.' 
"went away, and no watcher on our borders had seen him pass. And on the third "
"saved him from a  fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a  dream, "
"beautiful  green  front-door.  Then  he  strode  away,  just  about  the  time  when  Bilbo "
"     'No, I  am afraid not,  Sam, '  said Frodo. 'At  least, I know that such "
"moment  they were aware of  tall peaks, in  front  and on  either side, like "
"Didi Benedit,4041596289553,06-11-1988
"
"to each  other,  passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language; "
     Frodo accepted it gratefully. 
"left the Shire was passing through his mind,  and he  recalled and  pondered  "
when he learned that at the siege of Gondor there had been a great number of 
"Cordelie Dowdall,4041372768394831,14-07-1988
"
"run cold to think of. It's been very disturbing, if you  understand me.' "
"few stories at  any rate, if we can't do a nything else. I don't suppose he's "
"followed: and  then in the  moonlight, a  horseman could be seen dismounting "
"that the lean face of the Lord was lit as with a red fire, and it seemed cut "
"Shari Mather,4017951913789,29-08-1984
"
wooden  house  and  its  two  long wings.  In  the middle  there was  lying  a  great  oak-
"pocket  expenses,  time  required  and  remuneration,  and  so  forth""-by  which  he "
"halted, but Frodo had not  the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him "
"The  lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly  places "
"there the  power was spreading far and  wide,  and away far  east  and south "
"bare, jagged, barren as a slate. "
my pocket. I don't know why. And I don't seem able to make up my mind.' 
that Jomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back the enemy 
"uncomfortable  than even  he had  imagined. He was   cramped  and  miserable, "
remaining  strength  of  his people  already assembled; for as soon  as  his 
lay  down  beside  the  dwarves  and  tried  to  go  back  to  sleep  and  find  his  dream 
wing could have overtaken him. 
"whose. secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but  we cannot "
are still some very black patches.' 
over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope  in that way 
""
"me  warn you: I am not,  I  am a halfling,  hard, bold,  and wicked!' Pippin "
"     'Dark are her words,'  said Legolas, 'and little  do they mean to those "
"     'Your  business is  your  own, no doubt,'  said  the man; 'but it's  my "
best return as you came.' 
chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listened 
"down, down, into the dark under the mountains. "
     They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and  drink once more 
Denethor.  'Or may I not command my own servants?' 
"must  be  quick! Look  at  the  light!"" The  sun  had  long  gone behind  the mountains. "
"Black Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by himself, and set fire  to  "
"last horrible moments: the  pawing hands, the hot  breath, and  the dreadful "
"folk, and hearing the news,  and knowing where the  good beer was.  But  now "
"     'But  I  did  not summon you,' said Aragorn,  'save  only  in wish.  My "
"conveying  the furniture and goods that Frodo had not  sold to his new home, "
"Elf-friend!' he said, bowing to Frodo.  'Come now with your friends and join "
Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of Mazarbul. ' 
slipped aside and vanished. 
"####-     'It  would,' said Gimli, 'if I had a pipe to go  with it. Alas, I  lost "
"Denethor,  sitting in his high chair, waiting for news. And you  can tell me "
""
"an impromptu orchestra, and began a  merry dance-tune.  Master  Everard Took  "
bank beside the road with his grazing  horse beside him. It was Radagast the 
"leaping down over many stones in a deep-cloven bed,  overhung  with ilex and "
     'I wish you would tell me what happened!' 
"dangerous.  The marshes were bewildering and  treacherous, and there was  no "
"getting  his  wits  back  he  thought  of  the  answer.  ""Wind,  wind  of  course,""  he  said, "
"lying like  a  vast  dense shadow, a darker night under the  dark blank sky. "
"Ariella Lyddiard,4830636929222,07-12-1980
"
"little  life  of Men is  now endangered, but the  life also of  those things "
"spirits. 'The Thain has raised  all our country,' he said, 'and the news  is "
"     'Yes, I think we  will move on now,' said Frodo;  'but  not on the road "
"     '""They are indeed,"" said Treebeard. ""But you have only two  choices: to "
leastways not in decent places where there is tea -time.' 
"Francene Cammomile,4636310745417771,12-08-1991
"
Moria -silver? That was a kingly gift! ' 
It was on May the First that the two came back at last to the brink of the valley 
     Merry  slept  until  he was  roused by Legolas and  Gimli.  'The Sun is 
gardeners be in high honour.' 
"from his pocket,  and reading out the  address slowly and proudly (he valued  "
"####-Some  held in  readiness the  king's horse, Snowmane,  and  others  held the "
"     `I will look,' said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent over  "
before  he  got  them  all  stowed  and  went  to  his  own  little  bed  very  tired  and  not 
"remember them putting the  ropes in the boats,  as we started  off:  in  the "
"Gladden Fields,  where Isildur perished, three men only came ever back  over "
with many hidden holes  shrouded with weeds and bushes;  there were thickets 
"     He sought her ever, wandering far "
"for the  Enemy. But here we are  not above sixty  leagues, I guess, south of "
set off!' he said. 'Men need many words before deeds. My  axe is restless in 
"here the strength to withstand the Enemy, the  coming of Sauron at the last, "
while  he  has  debated with Gandalf and the Prince and other great persons.  
"with  grey drops. Then, mounting  their ponies,  they went  sl owly on again,  "
"stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the "
"well,' he  said. `But  in  metalwork  we cannot rival  our fathers, many  of "
a snail  with  a  heavy burden on its back. When his will could drive him no 
"Benjie Godding,4041371518145816,27-02-1989
"
     3.  
"husbandmen  from  Lossarnach, and to them Mordor had been  from childhood  "
"Cirith  Ungol, of which  he has told you  less than  he  knows. That much  I "
Gollum would die in a corner. But that was not what he had set out to do. It 
"the truth of the  matter . And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall  "
"same  direction.  But  if  he  dared  to  mention  it  to  Gandalf,  the  wizard  only  said: "
####-choose?(' 
"     'I  brought a  little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That "
"battle,  but  the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim and misty. By "
"hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.  "
"     They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftly "
     `I don't know. I can't help it. Master's  got it. Smjagol  promised  to 
     'Harrowdale at  last!' said Jomer. 'Our journey  is almost at  an end.' 
"gave it  to you, but maybe she'd understand. Do  you  understand, Mr. Frodo? "
"themselves, then they run  the  right  way.  You must forgive  them all; for  "
Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.' 
"came   by  arrangement,   and  removed  in  wheel-barrows  those   that  had "
"Darya Moizer,4041591234446814,04-07-1975
"
"Terra Fuzzens,4593841775257,13-07-1992
"
"not wish for such triumphs, Frodo son of Drogo.' "
 
a spring. 
"Christos Gonzalo,4041598631588,24-10-1979
"
"     And the Prince  Imrahil said. Your words, lord, are wise, if one who is "
     When all  the guests were seated before his chair   the  Lord  looked at 
"Sauron's throne, and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another  "
"Ethelin Fairley,4041376069860,06-07-1977
"
"yet taken  up my authority in the City. But  had I done so,  I  should still "
"are tired, but we shall rest better  when we are outside,' he said. `I think  "
"adventure,  so  we  must  hurry  on.  Of  course  helped  by  his  magic  ring  he  got  on "
"breakfast  in  the  dining-room by  the open window, when  in walked Gandalf.  ""My "
"their course southward. Night fell,  a nd still they rode on. The hills  drew "
"thing is  perilous. At  this  hour, to send it  in  the hands  of a  witless "
well.  Bard  had  rebuilt  the  town  in  Dale  and  men  had  gathered  to  him  from  the 
"Alissa Abela,4041370141943530,31-01-1985
"
"     'What in  the name of  wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet "
"     He wished  them  good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see "
host. 
for I have had teaching. It was these  records that brought the Grey Pilgrim 
the gaffers  and gammers.  Before Yule not a brick was left standing of  the 
tombs and tended the houses of the  dead. Beyond it went a winding road that 
"The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of Anurien, but harried "
     'Have you got it -- either of you?' he snarled. 
remained. He went without himself; and now as once more the  night of 
like 
"in a huge ring, just out of bowshot from the walls; and as the trenches were "
The ford was guarded.   As the king approached many men sprang up out of  the 
"Isobel Pinkerton,4017951149848,12-12-1997
"
"     'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. `My dear Frodo,  that  is just what the "
over the bridge. When they saw the travellers they seemed frightened. 
"about it, and there was water  (as in all ent-houses), a spring bubbling out "
"     'It is old, very old,' said the Elf. 'So old that almost  I  feel young "
"him to be present, for here his questions will be answered.' "
"Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned. "
and leaves were laid upon the mould. 
am sorry. I have paid.' His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;  twenty at 
"his  lilies, and then with a beckoning  wave  of  his hand  went hopping and "
"     A cry  from Grishnbkh  showed that  this was  not mere jest.  Horsemen, "
"lad: insisting on waiting  for my  birthday. A  funny way of honouring it, I "
"paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of  grass "
"Madison Talloe,4041591551614606,29-11-1978
"
""
"and  fast  though  he  sped  up  the  slope,  he  had  not  gone  nearly  far  enough  to  be "
scared. 
"     O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! "
"Frodo  and Sam. I was  afraid all  the time that it might come to that, if I "
"Jayson Donati,4068584426400,20-07-1998
"
"Nyssa Passby,4041378526651,07-04-1995
"
lights 
"Gandalf and my faithful Sam.' He looked down at Sam, who was snoring "
stern of glance. 
confidently  of  the  sudden  death  of  the  dragon  and  of  cargoes  of  rich  presents 
"Lincoln Devons,4041594412427796,25-04-1978
"
     A  shadow  of sorrow passed  over his face.  `Do you remember  aught of  
and they looked at Bilbo  as he slept and saw that his face was smiling. For  
 
Float beyond the world of trees 
"and ready. 'Stars  and glory!  But the Elves would make a song  of  that, if "
"we  know it by heart, and  hum it now and again. This  is how it runs in your "
"to Frodo and took his left hand,  awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it  gently  "
Aragorn's  torch drew near.  Then Aragorn halted and  went  to look  what it  
"on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the march, though for the "
     Gilthoniel A Elbereth! 
bridge  before  him.  The  staff broke asunder and  fell  from  his  hand. A 
"ship-keel facing east. Up it rose, even to the level of the  topmost circle, "
defenders shone and flickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in  the air 
"laughed and clapped, thinking that  Mr. Underhill  had taken as  much ale as "
"enough, as you remember, to get from this bank to the Carrock by the ford, but on "
"     Upon it  sat a shape, black -mantled , huge and threatening. A  crown  of "
"Kori Mickleburgh,4041377242151,08-07-1979
"
"Tarra Snape,4017953627061255,19-12-1987
"
"wandered  restlessly prowling through  the  night, he did  not say;  but  he "
under the willows. Less flies!' 
     Just  over the  top  of  the  hill they came on  the patch of fir-wood. 
""
"Arne Gouldsmith,4041591326111,04-02-1985
"
probably  for singing and story-telling  afterwards. He got  out of  bed and 
     'Dear  lord!'  cried Wormtongue.  'It  is as I feared. This wizard  has 
"or  getting  killed,  and  all  the  general  waste  and  destruction  that  dragons  make "
other  hobbits  belonging to the farm-household came in.  In  a short  while 
with  greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower  of guard and is now in 
But I  am of the House of Eorl and not a serving-woman. I can ride and wield 
"I do  not know. And if to despair, then  she will die, unless  other healing "
""
trust.' 
"     Still  she  did  not blench:  maiden of  the Rohirrim, child of  kings,  "
"the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road  would travellers be found, most often "
far below. We  got a sight of them  through  the tree-trunks.  They are very 
again beneath with a sullen glow of red. 
"deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke,  the sun rode  up "
He raised his eyes with difficulty to the dark slopes of Mount Doom towering 
 
Fire leaped from the dragon's jaws. He circled for a while high in the air above 
"Gimli Gluin's son, who had deemed  himself  more tough than Men, and "
save Elendil's heir.' 
"     `There  is  nothing,  Lady  Galadriel,'  said  Gimli,  bowing  low  and "
left him  alone: seems  to  have some  understanding with  Her  Ladyship.  I  
"moving like  ordered shadows, and at their head was one greater than all the "
but  also  because  they  never had  any  adventures or did  anything unexpected: you 
"     Saruman rose to his feet, and stared at Frodo. There was a strange look  "
"to the  grave Men  of Gondor  he seemed  to me, and likely to  prove a great "
"Gate, and were looking out upon Dale. "
"     'Yes,  they drink,' said Frodo. 'But do not let  us speak of that. Such "
"####-the stair,  and  looked  up darkly  at  the great  tower, fearing what might "
"     'Strider! How splendid! Do you know, I guessed  it was you in the black  "
"midday  sun  upon  the  snow,  and  passed  among  them  (which  was  lucky),  or  over "
was 
meet  and  clash. More  terrible  still  are  thunder  and  lightning  in  the  mountains  at 
aid us and to look on  the Heir of Isildur; for the  rumour of that name had 
"     'There now!' he laughed, flicking at their  legs. 'Where there's a whip "
'And I do not desire the speech of living men.' 
"     Slowly  Thjoden  sat  down again,  as if  weariness still struggled  to "
"     There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was  confused "
after  the  butterflies.  Bilbo's  eyes  were  nearly  blinded  by  the  light.  He  could  hear 
""
     And one white tree. 
"of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wherever the  drops of "
"     The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts. There "
"     'You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman,' said Merry. 'And also very much "
"seek allies in war. The  might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons,  it is "
"Another lonely journey, and the worst. "
and  nearly all  the men of the defence had rushed to  the  wall's top. Then 
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.' 
on  my  second day from  Bree-and they were there befor e me.  They drew 
thirst we shall have! But let them march now and sing! We have a long way to 
fish jumped out in a fright and fell on Bilbo's toes. 
against any that might pass the vigilance of Morgul and of Shelob. 
"tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will "
"Great River, and their boats turned  and began to speed southwards. Soon the "
"that he got from the trolls, and that he had quite forgotten; nor do the goblins seem "
on living quietly at Bag End. 
arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep for a moment. Slowly 
""
"faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had k nown more, I should "
"the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for  "
"     With  a terrible  cry the Balrog fell  forward, and  its shadow plu nged "
few minutes  after saying good night. 'The thought of  the dark globe seemed 
had 
yourselves at home!' 
"     The road now  turned south and went quickly downwards, running out from "
"     `Then  I cannot help you  much, not even with counsel,' said Elrond. `I  "
"Ellsworth Stilgo,4017957761000,09-05-1977
"
cautiously out. 
"     Sam,  clinging  to  Frodo's arm, collapsed  on  a  step  in  the  black  "
"     'You  have  journeyed  further  than  I,'  said Legolas. 'I  have heard "
"three guesseses."" "
shouldn't it stay there?' 
"beggars  could  tell  such  a  good  one,  they  might  find  me  kinder.  You  may  be "
"     'No,'  said Pippin, 'but  I'm not  comfortable. I wonder how long it is "
they would pass near the spot. 
"first was as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now  only barely to be  read. "
"     The cow in the garden madly pranced, "
"Ab Hemms,4616324981026042,12-12-1977
"
""
"fell, and  the Orcs were yet far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be "
"     'He is nearly spent,' said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. 'But  this comes "
"lay still as stone.  After a while, fearing that he would  drop off himself, "
"gathered  to  his  throne  in  the  ancient  halls.  Of  the  twelve  companions  of  Thorin, "
"was unbarred, hut no figure could be seen at its dark opening. "
"     `You won't,  if you talk about them, Mr.  Frodo,' said Sam.  'And if we "
space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank  
"he sprang on Saruman's back, jerked his head back, cut his throat, and  with "
"Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have "
"Niki Stoaks,4017952593739886,08-08-1992
"
"get that Silmaril from the  Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet he did,  and "
     Alive without breath; 
suited it better?' 
""
you my pity. For  you  are  a lady high  and valiant  and  have yourself won 
Sam.' Sam blushed. 
Nine 
"it,  in payment  of my  debt.'  Twitching  aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew "
"####-They were brown, shot  with a green light. Often  afterwards Pippin tried to "
also advise  this:  do not  go  alone. Take such friends  as are trusty  and 
even before they came to the gate Sauron sprang his trap. 
"     They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow;  "
"the Shire,' he thought, as his hand touched the chain on  which  it hung. At  "
waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive. 
Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs! 
"reached its shelter when the winged shadow  had passed  over once again, and "
to be more on their guard.' 
""
to part  with his young  friends weighed  on his heart. He  wondered how  he 
"     `Smjagol,' he said, `I will trust you once more. lndeed it seems that I "
grievous to see. Then Legolas laid his hands on his eyes and sang some words 
"about; but at first they  could make only small headway against the current, "
"city. And even as they  hastened on their way the wind brought  a grey rain,  "
"     O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! "
"     'But  now,' and  the  eyes became very bright and 'present', seeming to "
"Shaylyn Englefield,4041372628039758,07-06-1996
"
of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved. 
"way out of Mordor, and at least believed that it was by his own cunning. For  "
"chose,' said Aragorn. "
We must go warily tomorrow.' 
"""Farewell!  O  Elvenking!""  said  Gandalf.  ""Merry  be  the  greenwood, while  the "
Then Thorin was stricken dumb with amazement and confusion. No one spoke 
"the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs  to the tower -door. But it "
"himself, as he  walked towards his companions. Pippin and  Sam  had remained "
"     'Yes, I am all right otherwise,' said Frodo, sitting up and laughing in "
"Perl Ould,4666003161727715,27-05-1990
"
"     Fanuilos, le linnathon "
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion  in foreign 
"Trudey Moogan,4245131126000421,10-02-1986
"
"now  they  began  to  labour  hard  in  fortifying  the  main  entrance,  and  in  remaking "
"drums, or what is it? ' "
South away! and South away! 
on him that he was blind and sick. 
"maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow,   he says, and then he gave  me  a  "
was clothed beneath all in white. 
""
     It was well for  the Company that  they  had such  a guide. They had no 
away into some cranny and to hide. 
     With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank. and Sam was 
####-his road. and we must make haste to choose our own.' 
"delight in strangers,  and it  is  fair to hear words  of the Ancient Speech "
"they go out  from there roving round,  thieving  or ""gathering"" as they call "
     And where the Elven-river rolled 
"craft  of Men, but riven from the bones of the  earth in the ancient torment "
them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them. 
to choose between various dangers.' 
####-the while he hissed but spoke no words. 
     We'll wander back to home and bed. 
"Nerta de Banke,4017955479924514,12-01-1992
"
"you here,' answered Merry. 'They could  have reached here  by now, of course, "
end.' 
"Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of "
"     `And it seemed  to me, too,'  said Gimli, `that my choice  would remain "
"####-They've dug up Bagshot Row, and there's the  poor old gaffer  going down the "
"parting feast was held;  but Frodo ate  and drank  little,  heeding only the "
their  right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it  climbed up and 
"you understand me, and I'm  not much good at poetry  -- not  at making  it: a  "
     The hobbits  sat in shadow  by the wayside. Before long the Elves  came 
"but we never  went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And further  still "
"Claudio Seamans,4041372771805476,29-04-1979
"
"dried fruits,  and good red cheese, with clean  hands and clean  knives  and "
""
"Theodoric Cownden,4041596651971996,01-07-1995
"
     'But he wouldn't keep it on`' said Merry. `Not when he had  escaped the 
cliff  at  the  valley's  head  and  were  gazing  down  on  to  their  own  camp  below. 
carried out in my command. And what else did you  come back for? You went 
"Corenda Newing,4017956345976365,28-03-1990
"
"Donavon Shanley,4041375978627114,11-09-1997
"
"Claretta Balazot,4041371973116,12-04-2001
"
"know it,  when I come down the line!' He sent his  long  whip-lash  cracking  "
"Boromir has laid it on  me  to go  to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it; "
"pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes  seemed closed, but under the  lids he "
"not,  our horses met  Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with  joy. "
where he was sitting and came towards them. 
"Edlin Cowderay,4132643440613594,02-04-1989
"
"""We are getting near,"" said Gandalf. ""We are on the edge of his bee-pastures."" "
"cliffs  they had looked like mere bushes, when seen  far off from the top of "
"left me, and I did not wait  to gather news, or I might have been comforted; "
from the falling  stones. But eddying blasts swirled  round them from  every 
"from his belt and  handed it to Frodo. Gollum misunderstanding  the gesture,  "
"on bread and honey,"" he chuckled. ""Come and have some more!"" "
"maybe  when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will "
"     'Yes, and one  who  journeyed  with him,' said Pippin. 'And  Boromir of "
""
I have passed the  Old Took today! So that's  settled. And now I think I  am 
plainly what the  Black  Riders  are. If I  take your  advice I may not  see 
of Mirkwood. We shall need  them.  The Rohirrim have good bowmen after 
caught  him;  or  even  why  his  head  was  so  sore.  The  truth  was  he  had  been  lying 
"yet evil to  behold, and they received his  aid  and  grew mighty in  craft, "
"possible), when  things took  a  new  turn. The  path  stopped climbing, and "
"Wendel Attard,4041377370374014,21-12-1983
"
swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!' 
to 
"     In the morning a  grey light came again, for  in  the high regions  the "
"Karolina Warbey,4041379302557,09-08-1992
"
The  dwarves  were  still  passing  the  cup  from  hand  to  hand  and  talking 
"he'll wake up, in  a few hours; and  beyond feeling a  bit sick for  a  hit, "
war and the onset of the Shadow. And even as Pippin  stood at the Great Gate 
     'Come back now!' shouted Sam. 'Hi! Come back!' But Gollum had vanished. 
on  Thror's  Map.  More  important  is  the  matter  of  Chapter  Five.  There  the  true 
road. 
"my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land; for I  had a  "
"They made ready,  packing  their  bags  and lading  their  ponies. Their new "
"will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.' "
"afraid he will kill himself, and kill Faramir too. Can't you do something?' "
     'Ah!  the green smell!'  he said. 'It is better than much sleep. Let us 
"which there was  silent astonishment), and that he and his friends  wanted to  "
"     'It was not bird or beast,' said Frodo. 'It was a call, or  a signal -- "
southwards. At  times  they were pushing  through a sea of bracken with  tall  fronds 
all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to 
"Gay Terren,4041379788524,15-06-1987
"
"arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.' "
"     `No,' said Frodo. `There's not been a sign or sound of him.' "
"with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.' "
"Eugenius Tamsett,4041597954063358,01-06-1991
"
"Gandalf knew all about  the back-door, as the goblins called the lower gate, where "
spoke lightly;  but his heart was  moved  suddenly with  a desire to see the 
leaves whirled like birds in the air. When they came to the Chetwood already 
"Gwaihir the Windlord,  swiftest of  the  Great Eagles,  came unlooked-for to "
climbed high enough to look down through some opening. It isn't far let's go 
"Rodolfo McKinna,4017959765893391,17-04-1999
"
"valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached. "
"his enemies and joy in the hearts of  his friends, and they  shall hear  him "
"thing of many guises be caught, save by a feathered shaft?  ' "
"his, clear, untroubled by the foul air of the pit. "
"find, nor  feel  the  faintest flutter of  the  heart. Often  he chafed  his "
"Ileana Hordell,4017952299063,20-08-1992
"
"reappeared, hat first, over  the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an "
of  gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of  scarlet and  gold flapped 
"first, and  he  was soon deep in a dream. He thought he was back in the  Bag "
Chapter 9. Flotsam and Jetsam 
"     'One moment!' said Pippin blushing. 'Greed, or hunger by your courtesy,  "
"as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of "
"were summoned by Sauron, or knew the  secret  passwords  that would open "
"set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at  Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring "
"a  deep breath. 'And  now I  really must be starting, or somebody else  will "
"when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat  me, and "
"cried  and  wailed,  for fear and great wonder had  come upon  them with the  "
     Frodo did not answer  Gollum at once.  While these  doubts were passing 
"had not become all too light in the last few days, they would never have managed "
"birds sang, and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark leaves in the "
"Gate, sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax: Shadowfax who alone  among the free "
"right,"" said Thorin. "
mountains.  
"while!' And  he turned and  looked away to the North under  the great stars,  "
"help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity  Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself "
"     At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of  the wood. Far back  "
hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He muttered that he was 
"and nearer  now the bells jingled, and clippety -clip  came the quick trotting "
"makes me laugh. And Frodo wouldn't have  got far without Sam, would he, "
pillar was the standing stone. 
"terms. As a matter of fact Gandalf, who had often been in the mountains, had once "
"Boromir,  looking  in  wonder  at  the  lean face  of   the  Ranger  and  his "
"     herself was set, who thither came "
"enclosed  garden. No trees  grew there,  and it  lay open  to the  sky.  The "
"bearing flames, and wild Southron men with red banners, shouting with  harsh "
"     Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing, "
     There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved. 
     Hard and cruel and bitter  was the land  that met his gaze.  Before his 
"creature and squeezes it. But it doesn't know what the present can do, does it? It'll "
     The hobbits began to tell him the story of their  adventures ever since 
####-from the Old Forest. And then they lost no more time. 
was more than one.' 
each of the miruvor  of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he called a  
"words shook his very  bones with fear. 'Smjagol will swear never,  never, to "
"Lake  and  from  South  and  West,  and  all  the  valley  had  become  tilled  again  and "
there were answering calls from a distance. 
"can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we!  But "
""
""
"beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not name was over thrown.  And "
"go and see Elves and all! Hooray!' he shouted, and then burst into tears.  "
North by a  rocky  face  in which  there was an opening  like a door. From  that door 
perish alone in the wilderness.' 
not  stay. You  know  little  of the  lands beyond  your  bounds.  Peace and 
####- 
you shall see that at least the wolves  of the mountains do not devour them. 
"these spies was still loose, and you wouldn't  listen. And you  won't listen "
are out of sight.' 
least lay there. 'They have gone: the Halflings: the Orcs have taken them. I 
shore. 
"Arny Sibbet,4041599375805,23-05-1994
"
"it  is a long tale  of which the end is  not known; and  there are none now, "
was the account of  the crowning and marriage of Aragorn. 'I was  invited to  
"Felicle Tuting,4721137428295,14-08-1986
"
City walls large enough to reach so far or to stay the work. 
"would get up again. Then at last he rose with  a snarl, and went before them "
"Aurelie Crawshaw,4041596710520370,26-02-1993
"
""
followed.  Sam  hung back. He already felt insecure enough on this high  wet 
and elves were being slowly beaten down. 
elven-string.  Frodo looked up. Almost above  him the  winged shape swerved. 
"     'I do not wish for any sword,' said Frodo. "
"     When all  the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little "
     The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again  across the 
marching now. It was not a hasty resolve. Now at least the last march of the 
a while standing unheeded. Presently the old man turned to him: 
the Lady of Lothlurien gave them to me.' 
"     'Well,  that isn't anything  new, if you believe the  old tales.   And I "
Mithrandir's questioning. But  it seemed then a  matter that concerned  only 
"them for the present, too sick and weary to set guards or take turns watching. "
"health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion. "
 
"came with a rush, and he  had a club in his hand.  But when he  saw who they "
strangers should be able to cross with care.' 
"     Wandering  aimlessly at first in the  wood, Frodo found  that his  feet "
"     And  yet  - when they had  gone, the shadows closed  on  men  again, and  "
and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go 
wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond 
he slept soundly. 
"a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly from the "
"unnerved  him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his "
To dungeons deep and caverns old  
"     Before Frodo  could  stop  him,  he  sat down,  swung his legs over the "
"Tatum Huddles,4041372520803137,20-12-1978
"
"of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle of boulder stones. "
"bumped.  Also  they  can  move  very  quietly,  and  hide  easily,  and  recover "
"Kendal Ashment,4041374100725,13-06-1999
"
     Pippin woke  to  the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a night 
you not  to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say 
"in the  lands about were hushed: neither wind, nor voice , nor bird-call, nor  "
them now.' 
"next, with chains on your hands and feet  too, I expect. Don't argue,  there's a good "
"     Ent the earthborn, old as mountains; "
"torches  and  the  fire  flickered  about  them,  and  on  the  table  were  two  tall  red "
"before  it, and on the  further  half of the  plain were  other hosts  still "
"Rollie Creighton,4041371056094,17-05-1983
"
"Virgie Cubbin,4191360794492,19-02-1986
"
"under the walls, and was  rising slowly but surely. 'I shall be drowned!' he "
rustle  of  the whispering  voices  of  the  others  just  outside. Then  the  hobbit  slipped 
"suddenly all  three  halted, stiffening and listening. To Frodo  and  Sam it "
of froth and rage. They followed him into the forest until Bilbo had gone as far as 
Merry's hand. Sam thought he could glimpse black  figures running to and fro 
"busy between Thorin and Dain); but  for  the moment  the way was barred, so after "
"seen, save for a red gleam in their eyes that caught the glare of the  ships "
"all  the aid that my  knowledge, founded in  long years, can bring? Shall we "
"vintage,' he  said.  'May come in  useful,  if you think of getting married, "
"to Saruman a leather pouch.  'Take what there is,' he said. 'You are welcome "
"he looked down between his feet. There was one awkward spot, where there "
"Akim Hellin,4420171801083,24-05-1982
"
lying for days in hedges and ditches.' 
"and  small at  first,  but  growing  larger and  clearer  as it  approached. "
"     Quickly  they searched the bodies of  the Orcs, gathering  their swords "
"     'Truly,' said Aragorn. 'And I would do as  the master of the house bade "
inwards.' 
much about the stories of  old  days in Gondor;  and Denethor has given long 
"for a  while: I am rather  shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are  you, Gimli? Come "
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle  up the ridge 
"paddled away from the shore, and the River  bore them swiftly away. down the "
     Frodo made no answer. 'So! ' said Faramir. `I  wish then  to learn from 
Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won't do at all!' 
"new sort that  we have not met before. Not tall, but broad and grim, bearded "
"Gilberta Skeldinge,4017958981649,10-09-1977
"
"Kynthia Goggins,4017951187932899,05-12-1999
"
and Gandalf was a wise enough wizard to know it. 
####-you're oat the only guests.' 
"Vinita Sabattier,4885877492686,30-05-1996
"
"door posts towering on either  side,  but the gates were shattered and  cast "
"west of the valley, sixteen miles  or more from its mouth.  This  road  they "
"them  fall, worn out,  or  choked  with  fumes and heat, or stricken down by "
"this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough: "
"and other creatures  even more terrifying, some time or other  in the course "
"     'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,' said Denethor, 'and see "
in this edition make their first acquaintance with hobbit-lore need not troupe about 
now be less.' 
"""Go  back?""  he  thought.  ""No  good  at  all!  Go  sideways?  Impossible!  Go "
maidens she filled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn. 
braided on their proud necks. The Men that rode them matched them well: tall 
"Dwarves, a dwarf's head  will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men  or  "
"     'It is well,' said Thjoden. 'I  will ride  now  to  the Hold, and there "
"Siward Bysaker,4017950121012,09-10-1998
"
"women,  valiant  both  alike, golden-haired, bright-eyed,  and strong;  they "
slippery.  He halted listening.  At first he  could  hear  no sound but  the 
far-off  days of  the glory  of  Gondor  the  sea -kings  had built here this 
"Richart Geffen,4041591720917,08-02-1989
"
was time for  the Three Rings to  pass away. Quickly fading into  the stones 
"defied  Wormtongue's voice speaking  with your mouth, those Orcs would  "
"struggled on through the weary pathless land. The air, as it seemed to them, "
windows were level  with the  ground.  There  was a wide  arch  leading to a  
"     At that moment there  was a knock on the door,  and Sam came in. He ran "
"have perhaps. I advise you to remain with us, and here you shall be honoured and "
"     'That would not  baffle a Ranger,' said Gimli.  'A bent blade is enough "
 
stooping  in  a circle round the little  dancing and  blowing flames. A  red 
"gollum, gollum, gollum."" "
     As Frodo was  borne towards them the great  pillars rose like towers to 
"Melodee Daburn,4041374880672,18-05-1992
"
"the song became clearer, and  with  dread in  his heart he perceived that it "
"the truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe "
"     `You don't say much in all your tales  about the Elves, sir,' said Sam, "
"slinking will be over, and in vain.'  He stood up. 'It's dark, and we cannot "
"You  are  a  fool,  Bilbo  Baggins,  and  you made  a  great mess  of  that  business with "
but those who remembered still the lore of Westernesse told that it had been 
"but Beregond, who  had been  looking out from the battlement  as he spoke of "
     'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?' said Legolas. 
upon their heads. And when they were arrayed  they went  to the great feast; 
"moment, then bowing very low: `Good night, Captain, my lord,' he said.  `You  "
"""That  would  be  no  good,""  said  the  wizard,  ""not  without  a  mighty  Warrior, "
"was now  far worse: not to avoid the gate and escape, but to enter it, alone. "
Goldberry  set the table; and  the  hobbits sat  half in  wonder and half in 
"Stevie Schwand,4460797022938,13-09-1998
"
"without the light of the sun; but the hobbit, who liked holes to make a house in but "
might say; and lately  I have travelled far with him. But there  is  much to 
"     They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving  them standing in the "
"the Citadel. Step by step they  went, while Merry swayed and murmured as one "
     'We cannot leave you to hold the door alone! ' said Aragorn. 
`pawing 
"he  had  first  of  all  to  look  for  his  friends,  who  were  not  likely  to  be  very  far  off, "
"willing  to  let  it  stand  against  all my claim, don't you know. I may be a burglar-or "
sounding the retreat. 'Back to the walls!' they  cried. 'Back to the  walls!  
"hundred,  so we went ahead and spoke  with feigned  voices, leading  them on "
####-imagined  opened out before him;  and the firelit  hall became like a golden 
"hauberk was burdensome, and the helm weighed upon his head. His cloak he "
"up on Snowmane lik e a god of old, even as Oroml the  Great in the battle  of "
"     The morning was  passing towards noon,  and still the  Company wandered "
"hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or let us "
"Here grass is still growing, "
     Frodo and  Sam beat  first upon the  tree-trunk where Pippin had  lain. 
     Away shall fade! Away shall fade! 
"     'Hmm,  did he now?' rumbled  Treebeard. 'And I might have said much the "
help me. Where is he?' 
     Strider smiled. `Come then!' he said. `Let me hear it!' 
"twisted birch for  the  most part, with here and there a fir -tree. Many were "
"Chiarra Klimuk,4017957336779,16-03-1992
"
""
"Dolley Colquit,4041371132846,30-06-1984
"
"     'Yet it would  be rash to be sure of  their counsels,' said Gimli. 'And "
"gulf,  while the  rest  remained, poised,  quivering  like a tongue  of rock  "
"thought of something better than  that. Something  to shut your  mouth,  and  "
did not dare to waste his last guess. 
"     'Yes,  they  were  black,' said  Beregond,  'and  I  see  that you know "
"strong bodies, stout as  young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with "
'But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria.' 
"fifteen leagues thence to the vale  of the Morgulduin, if they went straight "
"Corly Raeside,4017956293139396,24-02-1995
"
somehow  I don't  think  I  shall  refuse. Perhaps  I have begun  to  trust my  luck more 
"""The  lights  are  coming  out  again  over  there,  and  there  are more  than  ever  of "
"""Mr.  Baggins!""  he  cried.  ""Here  is  the  first  payment  of  your  reward!  Cast  off "
"anxiously. 'He would  get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in "
     When  he returned he was not reassuring.  'We have come too  far to the 
     The Thain's Book was  thus  the first copy made of  the  Red  Book  and 
were less shy of Men.  They came west after  the  Harfoots and  followed the 
afterwards Merry and Pippin  clambered up on to the high flet. They were out 
"     `It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,' said Sam "
"cleft was outlined  in  the topmost ridge,  narrow, deep-cloven between  two "
"""These don't sound so creditable,"" scoffed Smaug. "
"and Sam, and for Strider. "
"said: 'Jomer! What  joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Nay, but "
"fell in  with a crash.  Then  there was  a long trailing shriek, fading away "
and  harbourless.  Yet  they would not  be safe. The watchful  eyes  both of 
"ash. The ground was fairly level, and  there was little undergrowth; but the "
"country Gandalf was bearing him. He rubbed his eyes, and then he saw that it "
"perceives  the very  heart of  the darkness,  its  own  secret has not  been "
####- 
     Frodo did not answer  for a moment. Then `No! ' he said. `No! I beg you  
"     He  opened the door, and they followed  him  down  a short passage  and  "
     AND THE 
shadow  of Mount Mindolluin and the  walls of the tower of Denethor white in 
"     'But he wields  great dominion, nonetheless,' said Gimli;  'and now  he "
on  the business of their masters.  Tonight they  did not intend to  go  far 
"to him, once  it got  away.  I  fancy this  is only an  afterthought of kind "
remember. For it was long since he  had worn it much:  in the black darkness 
cold. Pride and hate were conquering him. 
"Stacee Drewry,4403375785512378,26-08-1994
"
talking.' 
"not understand war above ground, whatever they may know of battle in the mines. "
"across the path before  them, and joined  the Silverlode in a  swirl  of dim "
"     'Maybe; and why not?' said Pippin. 'We had foul fare with the Orcs, and "
"grey-green bank, leading up like a  bridge on to  the northward slope of the "
Chapter 7. Journey to the Cross-roads 
and  proud he seemed again; and  rising in his  stirrups he  cried in a loud 
a green-bordered path that ran towards Orthanc; and they looked in wonder at 
"Ruby Pren,4626200660694573,12-02-1989
"
very much like a dwarf. 
"rest, led an attack. The dwarves huddled together in a knot, and sending a shower "
####-thought. But still the door is closed! ' 
he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber. 
dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.' 
"the  sides  of  the  barrels,  and  to  fix  on  all  the  lids  as  safely  as  could  be  managed, "
would have grabbed first and whispered afterwards. 
"glad,  for  now  the  northern  world  would  be  merrier  for  many  a  long  day.  The "
"could reach, there was not a sound. "
"again from the water. I came from the end of a bag, but no bag went over me."" "
"     `Gandalf!'  cried  Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting "
if he was troubled or displeased again. 
the  door  and  the  door-post.  He  could  see  outside  into  the  open  air:  there  were  a 
"     Lightfoot's foal, swift Snowmane. "
     'I don't know if the Road has  ever  been measured in miles  beyond the 
"would  be  coming north in  the near future. 'If  room isn't found for them, "
greatest  foe. A  power and mind of malice guided  it. As soon as  the great 
of the land. 
"####-clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than  you  suppose. When last I "
"in the Wild. I will give  you a travelling name now. When you go, go as  Mr. "
the barrow and sang together a song of Thjoden Thengel's  son that  Gljowine 
""
While hammers fell like ringing bells 
"     Pippin watched,  and he  saw the  horseman and the White Rider meet and "
"carefully  and solemnly, he  stalked down from step to step, and reached the "
south have convinced me that the weed itself  is not  native to our parts of 
"or save himself, or save the Ring? The Ring. He was not aware of any thought "
else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found. 
"Gollum cowered down, muttering curses on the White Face. Then Frodo and  "
""
drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That most important  source 
""
####-wetting their beards. Come with me!' 
Birds  began  to  sing  less.  There  were  no  more  deer;  not  even  rabbits  were  to  be 
and Sam  was  as busy and as  full of delight as even a hobbit  could  wish. 
for good. 
the hobbits. 'Only  three remain of the first Ents that walked in the  woods 
son for safety before he went  to  the mines of Moria. Your father went away  to  try 
let it.  But  I will not  have him slain. It is useless to meet revenge with 
thought to  have perished  fr om  the world. And Boromir tried to take  it by 
points  round  about.  A great cloud of  it  was  going up  far  away in the 
"Caressa Devaney,4017955925511352,18-05-1981
"
Looking  ahead  they  could  see  only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes  and  
"conquered, little better would your wages have been.' "
"hearts were steady as they walked beside them. But Arod, the horse of Rohan, "
"somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed, ere he  went away  from Gondor, "
"loud and clear – ""why do I get all your blame? For what fault am I to be deposed? "
"to guard your walls, if  he had been allowed to rule.  And even now we learn "
"aside  his  hood  and  cloak.  ""Here  is  Gandalf!  And  none  too  soon  it  seems.  If  you "
     In fair Lothlurien. 
"Liva Walak,4244684933278,21-12-1977
"
Rivendell.' 
"     'Only those, what d'you call 'em, lembas, Mr. Frodo. A fair supply. But "
"sunset, a wind over the  grass, a shadow that fled  and  passed  from sight. "
of Isengard. The  chief  and master of these was under  the Dome of Stars at 
"river, gurgling away in  the black shadows under its deep   banks. Then  they "
"remember, and the Lady's glass. I've  got them both still. But  lend them to "
"Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding  the storm. Unhappy fool!  He will  "
""
had yet seen in that land; and  with  a glitter in  his eye as he thought of 
""
"     'So you have  come  to  gloat too, have you, my urchins?' he said. 'You  "
mountains.  We're going east not west. And I'm  so tired. And the Ring  is so  
its  enemy turned  tail  than Sam at this unexpected flight. With a shout he 
"hewed Hbma's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he  was dead. "
"to make  it  lifelong.  In the  meantime,  whomsoever  you  take  under your  "
"Taryn Grafom,4017955787742,06-11-1977
"
weariness  and all their fears  had fallen from them. Hey! Come  merry  dol! 
"     Holding the hobbits gently but firmly, one  in  the crook of each  arm, "
     He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue: 
can.' 
He  longed to know  what was going to happen. He got up and soon was 
"Nazgyl the Ringwraiths, and with a storm of wings they hurtled southwards to "
we've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.' 
"large hand-bell. But  Nob, the  hobbit servant, came bustling in long before "
"But' - and  here he looked  hard at Sam  - 'if you really care about me, you  "
thousands  of those that he  had  gathered to him  in the South; but Imrahil 
again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will  never get it back. But 
"never had much practice in climbing trees, but they hoisted him up into the lowest "
"wakened  by  gold  and  by  jewels,  he  grows  suddenly  bold,  and  he  may  become "
leathern flask. `Just a mouthful each -- for all of us. It is very precious. 
 
     'You are weary of this day?' said Beregond. 
"spared the  trouble of  refusing it  again. All  my hopes are ruined,  but I "
He could hear the goblins beginning a horrible song: 
"before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little "
trees seemed to close in before them. 
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there 
"Reg Greenly,4041377175492,10-06-1986
"
"runes, and they come here sometimes.' "
"hoped. The land was rough  and hostile, and yet they made much progress, and "
"was no sign or sound of living thing. The night was barred with long clouds,  "
"Cob Leipnik,4017958595464886,27-11-2001
"
     For a while the travellers sat where once the old gates of Isengard had 
Chapter 8. The Houses of Healing 
"boughs,' said Thjoden. 'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help "
"several chapters  in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given  "
"Sam beheld  Mount Doom, and the light  of it, cut off by the high  screen of "
pass you by!' 
"to look upon. Some I saw riding, some striding, yet all moving with the same "
fell flat on his face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands 
"over the high  stars, as  if for a  moment they faded  and  then flashed out "
fast asleep. The butler went on talking and laughing to himself for a while without 
"vanished!  The stable-doors had all  been opened in the night, and they were "
It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.' 
""
"Maddi Parcell,4041594994626,26-02-1987
"
can. I'll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.' 
""
"White  Tower were blind? Nay, I have seen more than thou knowest, Grey "
wheel of fire.' 
"they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!' "
"Jaquelyn Simeon,4393439426532,13-11-1995
"
"Terza Tilford,4041599037257148,04-06-1976
"
"elves could not see him they could hear him. Soon they too took up the cry, and it "
"Korney Fenner,4017959371049859,19-12-1979
"
formerly than they are today; for they love peace and quiet and  good tilled 
####-admit; and  I'm a busy man.  But first one thing and then another  this week  
"""We have  found a dry cave,""  they said, ""not  far  round  the next corner; and ponies "
"     Ents the earthborn, old as mountains, "
"they were made of wire and horn,  beating out  the nightmare seconds  of  an "
reckoned that they had only a bare supply for three weeks. 
     Chapter 7   Helm's Deep  
"Nikki Rape,4017958910564,18-01-1998
"
"of Faramir,  Prince of Ithilien, and you shall  be its captain  and dwell in "
swiftly from the hall; and the Prince followed him. And when they came forth 
"Dallas MacKee,4041592682414296,23-06-1984
"
"Janey Gittoes,4041379962681,09-12-1994
"
"dark  spot against the  fading light:  a  great bird high  and far  off, now "
"power, power to order all things as  we  will, for that good  which only the "
leader.  `This is madness! We cannot  dare the Rapids  by night! But no boat 
""
across the River were throwing up hasty works of defence. 
those who once were wise they now speak evil of Lothlurien. Believe what you  
""
off their track. 
"any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it'll be guarded  too. "
"put  it  to  the  hole.  It  fitted  and it turned! Snap! The gleam went out, the sun sank, "
resting after a  great storm. Soon they turned  back and went  to the midday 
On  the  table  in  the  light  of  a  big  lamp  with  a  red  shad  he  spread  a  piece  of 
"wonder, and suddenly the slow-kindled courage of his race awoke. He clenched "
 
"'Hurry up, or we shan't wait for you.' "
blew such a blast  upon it  that it burst asunder. And  straightway all  the 
"Come back! '  He took Sam under  the armpits and hauled him up  again. 'Now,  "
"Thorvald Erswell,4041599292380,01-08-1982
"
dreams. He began to sa y to himself: 'Perhaps I shall cross the  River myself 
"     There was a silence. `They all resolved to  go forward,' said Galadriel "
"####-get down, we'd find all that green land a nasty bog, I'll warrant. Phew! Can "
back by the  Tower.  It might be  a  good point at which  to cross.  But  of 
The power  of the Black  Land  grows and we are  hard beset. When the  
"Carita L'Episcopio,4041591935390,24-10-1998
"
"Jourdan Nardi,4041378860647,24-08-2001
"
""
     Chapter 4   A Journey in the Dark   
"sound of anything except  the occasional  whirr of a bat by his ears, which  startled "
"     'Well, what's the next move?' said Farmer Cotton. "
to him.' 
"Saruman passed close to Frodo a knife flashed in his  hand,  and  he stabbed "
"and  they  guard  their  plunder  as  long  as  they  live  (which  is  practically  forever, "
"     When  they had  all drunk, the king went  down  the hall to  the doors.  "
     `The  blade  that  is  drawn from  this  sheath shall  not be stained or  
"the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped. "
great bows and shor t  broad-bladed swords. A  few  of the larger and  bolder  
followed it. There in the last  end  of  Egladil  upon  the  green grass the 
"vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away. "
"     the laughing-folk, the little people, "
"     By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! "
####-<h4>Chapter 3 </h4> <br>
"to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain's little game, and "
nearly  is marvellous  as himself. They work  for him  and  talk  to him. He does not 
"to lay thine axe to the right tree!"" ' "
""
"Lindi Canlin,4041371002577,04-09-1989
"
"Enoch Camies,4017957413280342,20-06-1993
"
"woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We  will make such a chase as shall be  "
"Kimbell Sybe,4017955486661281,17-06-1998
"
stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.' 
silence.  All the men in the cave stopped talking and looked towards them in 
"land and though we have heard rumour of them, little is said of them in  any "
"The King of carven stone, "
     The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran  about for a while 
 
"Rosalynd Pechell,4041379543861,17-06-1982
"
     the lamplit towers of Tirion 
"listened,  not  a  sound  stirred  below  Near  the  bottom,  as  well  as  he  could  judge, "
the 
the first finger of its hand has yet been stretched. All the East is moving. 
"shapely,  fifty fathoms from its  base to the pinnacle, where the banner  of "
"do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight "
"     'And you, Jowyn,' said Thjoden, 'is all well with you?' "
"certainly mean fighting. You won't rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by being "
"""Dear  me!""  grumbled  the  hobbit.  ""More  walking  and  more  climbing  without "
within the shadow of the gate he saw the Two Watchers. 
"Agna Illsley,4041374176261,04-02-1979
"
"     ' ""Up  with your beard, Durin's son! "" he said. ""For thus is it spoken: "
 
moment  I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear  what was said; 
"""No,  not  yet,  precious!""  Gollum  answered.  ""We  must  search  for  it,  it's  lost, "
then he hesitated and coughed. 
Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy. 
"     'I did,' said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. `I'll "
"     'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!' "
"countless  years  had  filled  them with pride  and rooted wisdom,  and with "
"of his neck above his left shoulder. He stood up, and it looked to Sam as if "
"     'Very wise,'  said Gandalf.  'But  as for  his long life,   Bilbo  never  "
"happened and to sneak behind a big barrel which held drink for the goblin-guards, "
"Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no  one will. This is the hour  of "
into  the dark recesses  where no light can come.  And  plink! a silver drop 
of thought. At once he was aware that  hearing was sharpened while sight was 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
were 
"Selig Jeeks,4041378667217080,10-02-1978
"
     'Oh! And how far is that?' 
"Grange Loudon,4017954680773,02-09-1975
"
"Clash, crash! Crush, smash! "
"cliff had been cloven by some  huge  axe, water came dripping down: the last "
wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist  was flowing  past him 
"with  the  effort,  and  could  not  get  on  their  legs  again  for  some  time. Knowing  the "
"     'It  was taken from him,' said Gandalf.  'The  strength of the Elves to "
"     They  stood still,  almost holding  their breath as  they listened; but "
""
When  they  got  to  the  edge  of  the  circle  of  lights  they  pushed  Bilbo  suddenly 
They spent a cold and  lonely night and  their spirits  fell. The next day  they set 
""
"should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two, "
"Off Bilbo had  to go, before he  could explain that he could not hoot even once "
"elf-fountains, goblin-barkers  and thunder -claps. They  were all superb. The "
     He  remembered that smell: the  fragrance  of Ithilien. 'Bless  me!' he 
Isengarders! Ugl®k  u  bagronk sha  pushdug Saruman -glob  b®bhosh skai':   
""
"Eveleen Kenneway,4041591235544,15-12-2000
"
"     `Trapped! ' cried Gandalf. `Why  did I delay? Here we are, caught, just "
was silent. It was the sixth of October. 
"     'No, not this Baggins.' "
"Grishnbkh.' He shuddered and said  no more, leaving  Merry to tell of  those  "
"stick by your own folk. Go to your filthy Shriekers, and may they freeze the "
"Kip Kineton,4041599997327,17-02-1998
"
"####-other places of less  royalty,"" my father  answered. ""In Gondor ten thousand  "
dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled  
sky was again  clear  would  Aragorn rise. Then he  sprang  up and  went and 
you trust too much in the Boss's kind heart. Sharkey's come now and he'll do 
The wanderer sleepeth. Now soft be his pillow! 
"     'I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,' answered "
"Dorothy Broske,4017951839646,20-10-1975
"
"none-save some young lads  that will not depart,  and may  find some task to "
Gandalf had  shaken his head  and  said nothing. Dwarves had not passed  that way 
"themselves. That's lucky, but it's too long to make a song about, till we're "
"     'But our need is for aid in battle,' said Jomer. 'How will you and your "
"faint or fall, and  all would be discovered, and  their bitter efforts be in "
"Gerardo Rolles,4848594391763,11-01-1978
"
"     The four  hobbits stepped off the ferry.  Merry was  tying  it up,  and "
"mountains, and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were  black. "
"be in store for old Gandalf, I'll wager it isn't a wolf's belly.' "
"changed here a little. Go and see!"" "
"this case their claim is, I think,  likely to be true. And  certainly it was "
"     'As Aragorn has begun, so  we must go  on. We must push  Sauron  to his "
pressed it. At length he stirred. 
it before. I might have been more careful on the road.' 
"     'Look!'  he said, clutching  Frodo by the  arm. They all looked, and on "
rustic tha n most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten 
"Danit Haistwell,4041596177785722,18-04-1993
"
queerness in these parts. There's  some  not  far away that wouldn't offer a  
marshes.  Already  men  were  jumping  into  the  water  on  every  side.  Women  and 
"     'Come  then!' said Gandalf, and  with that  he climbed the  steps,  and "
"Sig Guerreru,4041591079827,05-09-1984
"
"the arch. It was a squeeze to get  out, as the passages had been cracked and "
"came to  their country; but the travellers  did not heed them, for they were "
Moon was sinking behind the western mountains.  
"Denethor that even if Rohan itself felt no peril, still we would come to his "
turned over and crashed down from on high in ruin. 
"to render in our Common Speech, and this is  but a rough echo of it. It tells "
guests. Weapons they have  laid at your doors  that  are worth many a mortal 
"     'Maybe,  maybe,' said Gandalf. 'Though if he comes, it is likely  to be "
     the last whose realm was fair and free 
"     The  hobbits  were still  weary,  when  they  set out  again early next "
"     'You are our guide,' said Gimli, 'and you are skilled in the chase. You  "
"fallen,' Merry continued. 'It was then that I first had the feeling that the "
"in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on  a  "
"There  lies our hope, if hope it be. To walk into  peril-to  Mordor. We must "
the cheerless shadows  of the early evening began  to  fall the Company made 
"Dynah Raubenheim,4041594774705,25-11-1982
"
"     Sam stood up, putting his hands  behind his back (as he always did when  "
"second.  ""What  the  'ell William was  a-thinkin' of to bring us into these parts at all, "
more.  I wish to speak with the enemy who has  done me so  much wrong. 
"Utterly  miserable  as  Gollum  sounded,  Bilbo  could  not  find  much  pity  in  his "
"     'Indeed! Let's have it then!' said Frodo, unwisely interrupting. "
Suddenly  Bilbo  understood.  Forgetting  all  danger  he  stood  on  the  ledge  and 
"sport went well. 'Good, good!' he  said. 'He was dear to you, I see. Or else "
Chapter 10. The Breaking of the Fellowship 
"back.  Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down in ruin, "
""
"He's  precious.  I  don't trust  all  my lads,  and  none of yours;  nor you  "
Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking 
them off. We are on the wrong side! ' 
far away the sky was hard and clear. 
walls outside they had waited for his signal: all the  mounted men that were 
to much walking  on short commons  - shorter  at  any rate than  what in the  
"     'Well, now, what wa s  I going to  say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his "
"trail of green-yellow slime, she slipped in, even as Sam hewed a last stroke "
"all the light went out, and he  was back again in the world he knew.  Beyond "
"####-provinces. These are the Rohirrim,  as we name them, masters  of horses, and "
to shout stop! than to do it.' 
"evening. Frodo could not have called, for he had fallen asleep, and had slid "
the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs. 
was no doubt about it. It was a red light steadily getting redder and redder. Also it 
     Gollum cowered. 'On the Precious. on the Precious! ' he repeated. 
liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would the trapped wolf speak to the 
Bilbo said: 
the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will  now be your best defence against the 
"dying. They stood not far from  the  Citadel-gate, in the sixth circle, nigh "
irrevocable. He could never come back. Without a ny clear purpose he drew out 
for. 
"wheeled towards  him; but it seemed to Pippin that he raised  his hand,  and "
another parting which  they  were loth to make.  Soon Celeborn and Galadriel 
"wandering  about and minding the  affairs of Men and Elves, some time ago -- "
chance of it. And  he is bound  up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells 
summit.  The  skies  burst  into  thunder seared  with lightning. Down  like 
"####-     where shadow lies on frozen hills, "
forget Ugl®k and the crossing of Rohan.' 
"sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear. "
"and called by him There and  Back Again, since they told of his journey into "
if any name must be given.' 
have thrust a lane through the  drift; and for that all here may be grateful 
"that was  lost. That  only makes  eleven  (plus  one mislaid) and not fourteen, unless "
"Edithe Fowells,4041599453073,29-11-1995
"
"had  entered, will to go through and desire to come at last to the high gate "
"Unless I am quite astray, I guess that  we are above and to the north of the "
####-exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the  White  now.  Saruman 
"lordship over  all this  land,  and there  has been war  between us for many "
"     They  took a deep draught  of  the air, and felt that a skip and  a few "
"Brandybucks, and Grubbs,  and  Chubbs,  and Burrowses,  and Hornblowers, "
flattened at the summit. 
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw 
     'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no 
rise in the fame and fortune of the Cottons dates from this time; but at the 
     'I think  that I now understand  what he is  up  to. He  is plotting to 
"with a sound of pain and anger. A loud  scream came from Merry, and from far "
"     `Bill,  my lad,' he said,  `you oughtn't to have took up  with us.  You  "
things  lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at first  make out. 
"Osbourne Troy,4041372362806388,11-05-1982
"
""
"Jerrie Fortescue,4017958905226,21-04-1984
"
"     Mr FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE. "
"     'That all depends on  what you think the Riders would do, if they found "
"they forced their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tired "
     He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than it  had 
"a  most  unpleasant  sort  he  had,  but  he  never  got  near  the  Mountain. How  he  got "
talked about Adventure. 
"     'I don't like anything here at all.' said Frodo, `step or stone, breath "
from 
"wont to go. And they went up by steep ways,  until they came to a high field "
"mighty  heirloom  of some sort,  and such  things do not  breed  peace among "
"Violante Isoldi,4821489046280735,20-10-1990
"
nor any that go with you have leave to come  to  this  place unbidden.  This 
     'Look!' said Pippin. 'Strider the Ranger has come back!' 
"     'Begging  your  pardon,' put  in Sam  suddenly,  'I know where he comes "
"Marshes.  But,  of  course, they  would have  to  pass  through  the marshes "
the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from 
     `Her Sneak? What's that? ' 
"""Really you know,"" Bilbo was  saying  in his best business manner,  ""things  are "
"it may be that we shall triumph, and while there is any hope of this, Gondor  "
"Gaffer, but Bag End's a queer place, and its folk are queerer.' "
"Sargent Askam,4041599886918485,26-11-1985
"
isn't any water up here: not  a sound or a trickle  have I heard. And anyway 
"tradition.  They  had  changed  even  in  recent  years,  and  since  the  last  news  that "
"was in his face, as if a weight of years of sorrow  lay on him; and suddenly "
"you  can, and then move in with Rosie. There's room enough in Bag End for as "
"waiting to waylay them. The Wild Men had put  out a screen  of wary hunters,  "
"####-the  sunset, and  away on  the edge of sight a dark line, where marched  the "
"Tansy Hrachovec,4712958473432029,16-10-1976
"
"minstrels began to  make sweet  music.  Slowly  the hall  filled,  and Frodo "
"remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to  stray in search of grass, they "
"     Jomer grasped his sword. 'That I knew  already,' he muttered. 'For that "
folk help us?' 
my folk!' 
"river. They seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the ground for a "
"or  grunted  or  whispered  in  the  dark.  ""Drat  this  dwarvish  racket!""  he  said  to "
"meanwhile I have some other pressing business to attend to."" "
his riddling. 
"the Stars,  from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds, and all  "
"gave Frodo his mithril-coat  and Sting, forgetting that he had  already done "
"     'I will come,  if  I  have the fortune,' said  Legolas.  'I have made a  "
"""To  tell  you  the  truth, we  have  lost  our  luggage  and  nearly  lost  our way,  and "
"the errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the king's "
"bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot  hope to  lead even two thousands, "
while near the place where you halted. The three of us could not challenge a  
"Corty Bowerman,4041590529308358,16-07-1976
"
"Philis Heskey,4198150884136,08-05-1996
"
     At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of his chair;  but  he said 
"Kim Scalera,4041599544426,07-09-1983
"
"thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all. Evil things did not come into that "
"     Sing and be glad, all ye children of the West, "
the wall and made the fastness strong. 
abyss there appeared a single Eye  that slowly grew. until it  filled nearly 
the  moon-letters  Elrond  had  read.  It  was  he  that  made  the  dwarves  begin  the 
"After  he  had  seen  that Mr. Baggins'  one  idea was  to  get  away.  ""Well,  I  really "
"of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!' "
"eat us all,  if He gets it,  eat all the world. Keep it, nice master, and be "
mail-clad and  black-helmed and  bearing  a  long heavy  spear.  Behind  him 
reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the  East  to the service 
the onset. 
"Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion. "
"     Ash  nazg durbatulyk, ush  nazg  gimbatul,  ash  nazg  thrakatulyk  agh  "
"dazzled his eyes.  As they passed beyond the green field of the Tongue,  the "
"his going  that smoke on a gentle wind could hardly have surpasses  it, and he was "
Southern Star. 
     They now mounted  their ponies and rode off  silently into the evening. 
it seemed better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to 
"him  stood now another man, like  him and  dressed alike,  but  shorter  and "
     `And now a t last  it comes. You will give me the Ring  freely! In place  
saying that a host had issued from Minas Morgul and was already drawing nigh 
into their boots; and yet they would not give it up and go away. The hobbit was no 
till after dinner?' 
"####-dwindled, and their  foes devoured them, and their lordship passed,  leaving  "
looked them up and down and laughed. 
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last  
"out  now,  Mr.  Baggins.  I  am  ashamed  of  you  for  thinking  of  it.  You  have  got  to "
mastery. But in Moria  the burden of Gandalf had been laid  on  him; and  he  
again only to sling the hobbits to fresh  carriers. Either because they were 
the shadow of a large  boulder the hobbits watched him.  He seemed  to  have 
victory.' 
"Casar Sowden,4948315991387704,25-04-1988
"
"the cliff-face. To find a path in  these clefts, which  were becoming deeper "
"like mariners in a mountainous ship, look  from  its peak sheer down upon the "
entered the  Morgul Vale  neither Sam nor Frodo could  any longer guess. The 
"it ill, but the hobbits endured it.' "
yet live? How long? He has  a weapon that has brought low many strong places 
"####-     'No, I am afraid not,' said Frodo. 'But that is the best I can do yet.' "
"####-relief. `Well, if I don't deserve  to be hung on the end of one as a warning "
"Roch Mordey,4748262255316999,19-06-1996
"
gazing southward spoke  of a change coming  with a fresh  wind from the Sea. 
"the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so  to the Great  River,  and then  "
"that  direction  only  one  set  of  footprints  led-none  coming,  only  ones  going  away "
nor touch Orcs' meat or anything that they have mauled.' 
""
"Elfie Leggen,4017953624436906,29-10-1986
"
"     'Yet it is said in Harrowdale,' said Jowyn in a low voice. 'that in the "
"     'Things go ill,  my friends,'  he said, wiping the sweat  from his brow "
"bell-stems were  thrusting through the  mould . No  living creature, beast or  "
"the hem of the sky,  but it spoke to them, out of  memory  and old tales, of "
     Sam  laughed grimly.  `Cobwebs! '  he said. `Is that all?  Cobwebs! But 
     'Look!' said  Gandalf. 'How fair are  the  bright  eyes  in  the grass!  
their midst  and  there were  torches  fastened  to  some  of  the  trees  round  about;  but 
were still in  the heart  of the Shire. A few  creatures came and  looked at 
warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgotten that.' 
he 
"trees.  For some while he climbed, not caring which  way  he  went, until he "
"different points in the glade where they lived, and were busy spinning webs across "
here and  there  the glint of  distant water. Beneath them  on this southern 
     Turning  back they saw across  the  River  the  far hills kindled.  Day 
echo  of  many  hurrying feet behind.  A shrill  yell went up: they had been 
"Sigismundo MacDuff,4447634164304,09-05-1993
"
"a  great  reek  rising.  Then at last  his  gaze was held: wall  upon  wall, "
a  dart as the Southrons use. Yet I  believed  that it came from the Shadows 
"its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and "
"they slammed,  and all  light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came "
"yet, but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has "
"####-lay there. They had  been hewn  with many  cruel strokes, and  two had  been "
jeered. 'Now run home to bed before you're whipped.' Then they marched along 
and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber. He wore a ring on his 
son of Gluin for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least  to the passes 
"attention  of  readers, amuse them, delight  them, and at times maybe excite "
"Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good  enough for me, until the "
you.  And now  I think I'll be getting  to bed. We shall be  making an early 
"amazed; for  the slain Orcs were gone, and the trees also. Far down into the "
"metal,  light and  strong, and set with  many fiery stones.  Whether by some "
"     And Gandalf,  who  stood by, said:  'Men  may long remember your words,  "
"Arabelle Rishman,4041372091741203,23-07-1976
"
perceptible to them; and it grew  very cold. As they  stood  straining their 
"that was still all too near, hidden though it was behind the gloomy heights. "
"s seen him at all, in fact, for a week or two; but the Men  don't let no one "
"beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and  fetched a lantern  and "
plains. Away to the right at the head of the great dale the mighty Starkhorn 
"that  men would follow, that he would follow, even under  the shadow  of the "
 
     `But now  we must debate  no  longer. Your folk  must not remain on the 
"immeasurable roof, whose central pillar rose out of the shadows beyond their "
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over  
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces. 
"noble Wormtongue,' he said, what office of less honour would you accept?  To "
""
"turves  smouldering.  Hastily he stamped  out  what  was left of  the  fire, "
     Frodo and Sam returned  to their  beds and lay there in silence resting 
standing tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below. 
"     At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was  an arch of interlacing "
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo sharply. 
"you! You shall clean  grimy  hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your "
     The real war  does not resemble the legendary war in its process or its 
"for ever. For even if he could have escaped through the upper gates at once, he had "
"yourself cannot choose between them. Jowyn, do  you not love me, or will you  "
Mountain. 
strangers; but only Jothain dared to speak openly. 
     He stepped forward; but Boromir  stood irresolute and did  not  follow.  
"the Pelennor, under the shadow of Mindolluin, there came no gleam: they were "
""
frightened hobbit with him. 
"     'I'm  coming  down to you,' shouted Sam, though how he hoped to help in "
"all the halls within must be filled with his foul reek."" "
while you still  may. At the sunrise I  shall take you to the  Lord Denethor  
foaming down  upon the land. And then at last  over  the miles between there 
northern heights rose  like  a line of distant cloud hardly darker than  the 
"     So it was  that Frodo saw  her whom few  mortals  had yet seen;  Arwen,  "
"time towards Rivendell. `I got here without  much adventure,' he  said, `and "
"business.  It  was  no  good.  Gaze  as much  as  he might,  he  could  see  no  end  to  the "
you feasting and  idling-and smoking!  Smoking! Where did  you  come  by the 
"Now we can eat fish in  peace. No, not in peace,  precious. For Precious  is "
Bilbo  was  now  beginning  to  feel  really  uncomfortable.  Whenever  Smaug's 
     Two of the Shirriffs immediately  left the  party and went towards him. 
through  a  rent  in  the  cloud.  A  gleam  of  light  came  straight  through  the  opening 
"Tomas Spearing,4041372941346484,02-01-1993
"
Then  suddenly  goblins  came  running  up  yelling.  They  thought  a  battle  with 
"there were words in that cry, though  I  could not catch them. But no hobbit "
"The river is silver, the shadows are fleeting; "
"the great  Orcs with the strange badges. There was a quarrel, I guess: it is "
"between them. `Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. 'Why "
"     `I do  not know,' answered Aragorn; `but a shadow and a threat has been "
"things that make us laugh; or about food and drink, of course.' "
"there  was not clear. Back  he  ran down the  steps, down the  path  towards "
"young pale moon, watching the ever -moving  stream;  and the  sad  reeds were "
"afraid of fire at all times, but this was a most horrible and uncanny fire. If a spark "
"Daven Hobson,4041591314869,01-10-1985
"
"far  too much  hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go yourself, and  be "
     'Go back!' he whispered. 
off west across country.' 
just  time  to  catch  them  up  before  they  began  to  cross  the  bridge.  This  was  the 
"not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns  the Ring, "
paths are drowned deep in shadow; and out of a grey country darkness lies on 
     For a while the hobbits sat in silence. At length  Sam stirred. 'Well I 
"dreams  of  greed  and  violence,  lying  there  in  his  stolen  hall while  the  little hobbit "
and went up  the ladder  like a cat. His head came out in the middle of  the 
"     'The  Paths  of the Dead,'  he muttered to himself. 'The  Paths  of the "
"a time their hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in "
"watched,  and  I  will  take  your  turn  for  you,  if  you  like.  There  is  no  sleep  in  me "
"to lay  hold of them, even when Merry had cut off several  of their arms and "
"     Si vanwa nb, Rumello vanwa, Valimar! "
"     'I came  across,'  said  the evil  voice.  'A winged  Nazgyl awaits  us "
"shape, and  visions of  far la nds  and  bright things that he had  never yet "
"they had no other weapons, as far as could be seen.  As the  travellers rode "
     'I  should make nothing of it  but a log and the dusk and sleep in your 
"     'Yes, I see,' said Frodo.  'For one thing, I see that you're behind the "
"stayed with  me, they  got  to know  my Lumpkin;  and they  smelt him in the "
"hobbit-talk. He had  a  tall tankard  in  front of him, and  was  smoking  a  "
"be  a tongue of the Black Land, since  it  is foul and uncouth. What evil it  "
"and blessed him, and he said: "
"blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter cold. "
"he supposed.  Then he  forgot the  point, for things had  plainly  gone  far "
that increased as travellers  relied on it alone and did  not mingle it with 
"wizards  count  differently  to  other  people.  But  now  please  get  on  with  the  tale."" "
"came  into  the  strange  stories  before  the  beginning  of History,  the wars  of  the  evil "
     The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the  end of the line 
banners  broke  and  flowed in the wind;  and upon  the White  Tower  of the  
"     Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage, "
The  elves  were  the  first  to  charge.  Their  hatred  for  the  goblins  is  cold  and 
"joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.' "
"cannot  be  more  than  nine o'clock,'  he thought.  'I  could now eat three "
"things unbidden,  and those  are  often stranger  and more  profitable  than "
Merry now  had  enough  sturdy  hobbitry to deal with  the  ruffians. Scouts 
He kept on screaming. 
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with 
gleam of  water or hear any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts 
out of her hole. 
and seeing it on his hand.' 
"when the fit takes  them. We have  a  private entrance. Frodo  went in once, "
"     'Now we had  better get home  ourselves,' said  Merry. There's something "
"Sam's breath began to come in gasps. The orc had soon passed  out  of sight,  "
the urgent  thought  of his enemy:  'Grishnbkh  knows about  the  Ring! He's 
"     'I am sorry, Sam,'  said the wizard. `But when the  Door opens I do not "
     Picking up  his  staff he  stood before  the rock and  said  in  a clear 
"Karney Cressey,4017958080740816,22-10-1984
"
"long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the "
"Jasper Cettell,4017957456596729,30-10-1986
"
"It was difficult to get them to understand, what with their dizzy heads, and the "
that  end  in  his  eye before he could step aside. That put him out of  the battle  for a 
food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed  in your packs. You will 
     Gandalf held it up. It looked  to be  made of pure and solid gold. 'Can 
over; and not one living foe was left within  the circuit of the Rammas. All 
gloom the hobbits saw that the cave was larger than they had guessed and was 
"Sam Bedward,4041377041857769,21-04-1987
"
Meriadoc 
claim it by right.  For this assuredly  is the palantnr of Orthanc  from the 
"grey night, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled  moon; but they  saw nothing,  and "
"     Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland, "
"     'A legend  of Rohan!' cried  Legolas. 'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has "
Chapter 11. The Palantnr 
"####-     `No, not  to be seen,' said  Frodo.  `But  I still  feel  that they are "
"like  to the Tower  of  Orthanc,  hard and dark and smooth, unconquerable by "
long 
"Cathlene Kerbler,4041371380510,05-03-1987
"
     OF THE 
"each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.' "
"western slopes,  and the road  on  this  side  was not blocked.  Yet in many "
"returned  Baggins  was  genuine,  and  they  were  not  on  friendly  terms  with  Bilbo "
""
 
"along one of  these  avenues, where  the  stones  were unusually  large  and "
"and at their rear  the banner  of Dol Amroth, and the Prince. And in his arms "
"off in  one o' them ships  you used to prattle about, sailing, sailing. What "
"sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue  vaults of Varda  "
"the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.' "
stand. 
"generations.  Our days have darkened,  and  we  have dwindled; but ever  the "
"most  of his time  now in his room,  except at meals. For these he was still "
abroad. Yet the air of the valley was heavy  with fear and enmity. Then they 
"""What shall we do? Curse them and crush them! We must wait here, precious, "
the  Golden  Perch.  Sam  sipped his  beer  suspiciously.  He had a  natural 
Sam slowly. 'It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quite 
"years,  the shining sword  bit upon her  foot  and shore away  the claw. Sam "
"towards the mountains and held up his sword. `Farewell, Gandalf! ' he cried.  "
"was a slash. 'This was  the stroke of Frodo's sword,' he said. 'The only hurt "
"all men in the City stood to arms. Now ever and anon there was a  red flash,  "
"hearts.  You hold out your hand to me,  and  I perceive only a finger of the "
"made him stoop.  It  all seemed very weedy and rank  somehow, and thorns and "
"     Frodo overheard  these  words, and understood that  Gandalf and Aragorn "
"Warden of the Houses was troubled, and he spoke to Faramir. "
"away,  and breaking off a hanging branch smote  the side of the  willow with  "
"have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or confused. Rangers "
     'O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze 
careless descendants;  and groves and  thickets there  were of tamarisk  and 
"Maurits Lenden,4041373015049,14-12-1986
"
"made at the request of King Elessar,  of the Red Book of the Periannath, and "
"####-pinnacle of the  Tower of Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet "
"Abie Grabban,4017950323568,07-08-1998
"
"Dede Sabathier,4041376238762,23-06-1975
"
of 
strength came  now streaming to the field  out of  Osgiliath. There they had 
"Ricky Swaisland,4041592134043,07-12-1998
"
the  Mountains.  Not far  down the bank Strider pointed out a  stone in  the 
"where Mirkwood is, and the Withered Heath where the great dragons bred."" "
"will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do what  I can in "
"them,  twelve dwarves and  the hobbit. Where  indeed was Thorin? They wondered "
     They  watched  the  pale  rings  of  light  round his lanterns as  they 
"hurry. ""Don't  be hasty"" is  his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say "
"a long road, and much to do.' "
"opened  the  water-gate,  and  out  the  barrels  floated  on  the  stream,  bobbing  along, "
stepping swiftly back to the table he lifted from it the pillow on which his 
"old  Osgiliath  came  climbing up,  and crossing,  passed out eastward  into "
"I  do  not come soon, go on!  Go  quickly and choose paths leading right and "
""
     'All right! '  said Merry.  'But  we shall be having  a visit  from  the 
"by  them, and slowly  his  boat departed, waning to  a dark spot against the "
he suddenly saw the pale eyes sticking out at him. 
bodies of the slain; yet still driven as by a madness more and more came up.  
"his  heart  the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that  having "
     'Gollum!' cried  Frodo. 'Gollum? Do  you mean  that this  is  the  very 
"no doubt of  the main way,  for it was straight, and did not turn, and still "
"You cannot trap me, though you try, "
"the  sigh and murmur of  the  waves on  the shores  of Middle-earth, and the "
     there they open first in spring and there they linger latest. 
"there, black and  tall and stony, and the great trampling and scoring of the "
"     Where now are the D®nedain, Elessar, Elessar? "
in. Then he went and sat by himself a few paces away and whimpered a little. 
     PPS. Make  sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men 
"     'I will be ready,' said Merry, 'even if you bid me ride with you on the "
"small bag which was all his luggage  across his  shoulders, the wizard leapt "
"not an echo, for when they halted it pattered on for a little all by itself,  "
"""It  seems  a  great  big  hole  to me,""  squeaked Bilbo  (who  had  no  experience  of "
"     'Soon it becomes a swift river, and  it  gathers water from  many other  "
"regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; and even now  I bear none, though you  "
"display far chambers that  are still dark, glimpsed  only as a  void  beyond "
"fail, then I sa y to you, Gimli son of Gluin, that your hands shall flow with "
fair valley of Rivendell.' 
roads. 
"     `Not make  the nassty  red  tongues,'  hissed Gollum. `Fire, fire! It's "
"     `He would not have come,' said Gandalf. "
""
"Tanitansy Foley,4369019794531,23-01-1994
"
"that is true, even though he has  not yet  sat  upon the throne; and it will "
"used to like  tales himself once, by his own  account. I wonder if he thinks "
 
"of Arathorn, Elendil's heir of Gondor.' "
but what it was he  did not know. Like a dream the vision  shifted and  went  
"""We might go from there up along the River Running,"" went on Thorin taking "
"beard grow ever longer; yet he was ever a dwarf with a stiff neck."" "
"     Even as he  spoke they heard again  the pursuing drum-beat: Doom, doom, "
""
"keeping watch, and still I expect smokes and steams would come out of the gates: "
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves 
said to himself. 
"one  step  veritably  down  into the land  of  Mordor, that  step  would  be "
"Thebault Ashforth,4017951413853083,08-12-1977
"
"support to your master,' answered Gandalf in a soft voice. 'Yet in two  ways "
"Mae Staggs,4041597215474881,05-01-1982
"
"rich reward, and you shall have the friendship of the Mark for ever.' "
"a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end.' "
stone-rings  upon the  hills and in the hollows among the hills.  Sheep were 
"river  runs in a very deep channel. You could see i t  now, if  you stood up. "
to wonder whether  a most wretched  adventure  had  not  come  right  into his house. 
"and  Meneldor the swift; and in a dream, not  knowing what fate had befallen "
had fallen: he  knew somehow that the time was very near when  he must leave 
"     'I will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'How many?' "
away  north  are whiter  than  they  were;  snow  is  lying far  down  their 
"more. By  the morning, yesterday morning, the water  had sunk down  into all "
     Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo! 
"They would have been surprised, if they could have seen what happened down "
"Haze Eilers,4643530453323702,18-02-1984
"
"aranion or kingsfoil, so long as you have some.' "
"Helm's  Dike,  an  ancient trench  and rampart scored across the  coomb, two "
He  sat  up  painfully.  Looking  into  the  valley  he  could  see  no  living  goblins. 
 
"lighter,  and  then  suddenly the clouds broke,  and  their draggled fringes "
"Nari Fernandes,4041374057297469,09-10-1991
"
came leaping up behind. The stench of death was like a cloud about him. 
most splendid sight of all: they were eating and drinking and laughing merrily.  
"""Where else  should  I be?""  said  the wizard.  ""All  the  same  I am pleased  to  find "
"Karee Strettell,4017950184572,04-07-1991
"
"Karia Culshaw,4041590117081,31-01-1982
"
"even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after  "
""
"or water, not to mention  food. And these  are Men not Orcs,  or  my eyes are "
to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope remains.' 
an  enormous  long  wooden  pipe  that  reached  nearly  down  to  his  woolly  toes 
"     Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing? "
"passed out of  his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling  the wall, was aware "
"####-     'As for Faramir,' said Gandalf, 'he must soon  learn that his father is "
from Orthanc.  I sent him before me to watch the River and  gather  tidings. 
and their hands met and clasped. and so together they still went on. 
the  City  men  sang for  the joy that welled  up in their hearts  from what 
are you going then?' 
""
until the morning; but that is now at hand.' 
"Imojean Bagehot,4017951571956744,31-10-1997
"
wood. Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!' 
"of the Enemy would leave  its  mark, too, leave him open to the summons. And "
"Fielding Byram,4017957890692,01-04-1986
"
swift-moving  blur.  He cast  himself upon  the  ground  and  listened again 
"Helli Sallenger,4041595881413795,13-12-1999
"
and it was enough. 
"the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then?  "
"     `What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were  mine,  and which "
can  do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines 
But they had no chance to fly yet. There was a b low on the door that made it 
you.' 
morning.' 
I  go myself to  war with my  men.  I  bid  you come with me and prove  your 
will take some time. Wouldn't you like to put us  down? Couldn't we sit here 
thy  horn? Whither  goest  thou? O Boromir! But he was gone. The boat turned 
"Estella Volet,4872082192681,17-08-1981
"
fisshes? ' His tongue lolled out between his sharp yellow teeth. licking his 
"     `You forget the Marshes,' said Frodo.  `I hope nothing has happened  to "
"He  guessed  from  the  ponies,  and  from  the  traces  of  the  camps  he  had "
sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed. 
"specially to my cousin Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people well-armed, "
here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself. it seems. And I  
"Allsun McSharry,4041379088131,06-01-1996
"
"huger  and more  bright,  and  not  the most  foolish  doubted  that  the  prophecies  had "
"Gearard Boldock,4041594121022,24-01-1980
"
"Grady Shortan,4788054992181,15-01-1979
"
"     Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge, "
any fear at all for any of you. 
""
"you may have seen, and you do not find us all  unprepared. Gandalf the  Grey "
"still got some more jacks that haven't yet come out of their boxes?"" "
Frodo. 
"the words: fair was the music, but it did not comfort him. "
"""Merry  is May-time!"" said Bilbo, as  the  rain beat  into his  face. ""But our back "
"hill-side,  wher e later a great  stone was set up with a garden about it. So "
"     'We need not  fly much further,' said Jomer.  'Not  far ahead now  lies "
 
saying something about water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell 
Imladris as some call  it.'  Here  Faramir started  and grew  intent. 'Seven 
"     'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' "
watched.' 
"blurred  or  broken,  the  outline could be seen of an  anvil  and  a hammer  "
let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back  to  live 
"nightmare; but  my  vote hardly counts,  as I am  not going on the  journey. "
"your head! Let me  see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not  his way; but he "
"fiercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud.  Out he sprang, and even "
hardly to he seen. The miles went by. The waxing moon  sank into the  cloudy 
"bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than mortal men. "
     Everyone in the room was now  looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one  of 
"     There was  a long  silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound  was "
""
before. Yet steadily the  mountains were drawing nearer. South  of Rivendell 
at need is in fetters. You did rightly.' 
we 
night.  Then Elrond  removed a  splinter. It  was deeply  buried. and it was 
"     'That's  hard  to tell,' said  Cotton. 'They moves  about and comes and "
     Chapter 9   Shelob's Lair  
latest I shall come back  for  the farewell party. I think after all you may 
"Aarika Hamlin,4041599713950099,22-11-1980
"
"Kimbell Millis,4017954656012698,06-10-1981
"
"Franciska Showt,4215873550222,02-12-1980
"
"Hobbiton  and Bywater every  day in the year it was somebody's  birthday, so "
"ounce as a rule, especially after long possession; and Smaug was no exception. He "
"couldn't help  myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless  me, sir, but I do "
"Carmelia Rene,4354453164631660,09-06-1985
"
"Sauron of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely  to wither "
"suppose we  could  hire  them, but we might be able to buy them,' he  added,  "
"""To look ahead,"" said he. "
"Kinny Ainley,4014569424095560,02-11-1996
"
"     'No,'  said Gandalf.  'But  you have not plotted to  cover all the world "
"through, out into a wide clear light. "
friends of mine.' 
"their  rear,  and  broke  like  a  clap  of  thunder  through  the  ring.  The  dwarves  were "
""
####-awful  howl.  Trolls  simply  detest  the  very  sight  of  dwarves  (uncooked).  Bert  and 
"Burk Strainge,4041591093294537,11-05-1986
"
"     'Can the Riders see?' asked Merry. 'I mean, they seem  usually  to have "
"of other  horses came; and  presently the  thudding of hoofs was heard,  and "
"Editha Marmion,4693416519393,03-02-1980
"
"lowest down in the easiest tree, ""be quick, and give Mr. Baggins a hand up!"" "
"through  yet,  and to what  he  will  come in the  end  not even  Elrond can "
"Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled, "
them! Black Riders!' 
####-the time  we were left  alone. It  was a dreary day; and we wandered about a  
Now the days passed slowly and wearily. Many of the dwarves spent their time 
"more  bitter than the one before, as  their  strength lessened and  the land "
"fortune twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses "
     'We have not only to reckon with those who fought  on this field ' said 
     'Black Riders!' cried Frodo. 'Where?' 
far  worse  this  time.  And  they  simply  could  not  find  the  hobbit.  Every  time  they 
     Goldberry spoke  to them  and recalled their eyes and thoughts.  'Speed 
"     A  strong citadel  it was indeed,  and  not to be taken  by  a  host of "
benefits: Saruman will take all  that he can find.  If you want anything for  
And horror in the halls of stone 
"could see little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky above  was  less "
I did not know  that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at 
Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide --  if the hand that wields it 
"before, and as a friend? Much  have  I desired to see you, mightiest king of "
rest. 
"     'The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Thjoden son of "
all wasted.' 
"asked what you are  going to do with us, and  which side you are on? And did "
"'Gandalf, Elrond -- all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves "
"####-his return to his home he never spoke  of  it  again to anyone, save Gandalf "
dared to show myself. Bare time was given me to come to your aid.' 
hundred years  old  - Frodo was  surprised and much  moved: she had left all  
"Cordi Pigford,4017950366369,16-02-1999
"
"return-and  I pray  that we  may  see it,  though no  wise man  will deem it "
"forward, he made the  end fast round his waist, and then he grasped the line "
beside it. Let us go and see what things are like now! ' 
dell under Weathertop. 
without  resting  to  discover where  exactly  in  the  smooth  face  of  the  rock  the  door 
growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.' 
deep blue  like  clear evening sky seen from  a lamp-lit room. Its face  was 
"her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but "
"now, Sam dear. You can't help me in that way again. I am almost in its power  "
stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging 
"Chancey Falks,4041593400500,19-04-1984
"
"slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back with a jerk as "
"twice over, before they were satisfied.  "
trunks and branches of trees hung  dark and threatening over the path. White  
"     `I  would  ask  one thing before we go,'  said Frodo, `a  thing which I "
"     'Not idly do the leaves of Lurien  fall,' said  Aragorn.  'This did not "
on the edge of the Old Forest.' 
"####-     'Come  hither!'  he cried  to his servants. 'Come,  if you are  not all "
have.  And  it may  well be that that time is  drawing near at last. For  if 
listened  to  this encouraging sound for a moment and  then  got  off  their 
valiant men and keep open  the High Pass  and the Ford of Carrock. But their 
"Jerrilee Goozee,4220826463572,21-04-1997
"
"Bilbo  could  not  guess  what  had maddened  the  wretched  creature,  but  he  saw "
an army of Tooks in the morning.' Merry blew  a horn-call after them as they 
"before they went down into the Nameless Land, maybe the last meal they "
"beard, and then you would be thirteen again. And the knotted ropes are too slender "
break out. 
""
"or of  Glamdring;  and  that was some comfort, for being the work of  Elvish "
"####-I am spared.' He broke off and turned to the window again, singing softly. "
was the song as Frodo heard it: 
was slow and gloomy. They spoke  little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart 
""
end.' 
lie down and sleep. 
"     He came, a  weary man  with dinted helm  and cloven shield.  Slowly  he "
feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long face was covered with a  
twig from  a living tree  in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead 
"     'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled. "
"Denethor,  who bring you this token  of  war. Gondor is in great need. Often "
"""Thorin and Company to Burglar Bilbo greeting! "
"relaxed, and he began to tremble. "
"Joyce Amaya,4041591241471110,27-09-1991
"
     'Nay!' said Gimli. 'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here 
"     Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening  of the Nameless Land  fell "
you later.' 
     As  soon  as he  set  foot  upon the  far  bank of Silverlode a strange 
"dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep. "
you've got to have grist before you can grind; and there was no more for the 
     'Hobbits?' said Jomer. 'And what may they be? It is a strange name.' 
"bit, bridle,  whip,  or  thong  will  tame  him.  Farewell, Shadowfax!  Have "
bit of lembas first.' 
"call Hollin; many Elves lived here  in happier  days,  when Eregion was  its "
"hurt you. I'll go with you, and you shall  come to no  harm. Not unless they "
     'To health?' said  Jowyn. 'It  may  be so. At  least  while there is an 
greater of heart than of stature?' 
"barrel while it was held steady against another. Up he crawled like a drowned rat, "
"Michale Burbudge,4017955983606,20-10-1984
"
"mountain it crawled upwards, until it disappeared into the blackness above. "
bedrooms. When they  saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice: 
"arch fled. The monstrous Watchers sat there cold and still, revealed  in all "
silver -birches that stood at the  bottom  of the bowl.  Two  other paths led 
"     'Then Jomer son  of Jomund,  Third Marshal of Riddermark, let Gimli the "
"Dannie Andrieu,4017956201886260,18-03-1990
"
"backs, long swords were at their belts, their burnished skirts of  mail hung "
"failed.  The Enemy has  found it, and now his power waxes; he sees  our very "
"the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran "
of the mists that lay thick  on  the world. Touched  with  gold and red  the 
     Then  one of  the  younger folk called for  a song. But at that a  hush 
"all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the "
     'No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.' 
"     'You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo.' he said. "
centre four ways met. Behind them lay the road to the  Morannon; before them 
"the  beams were  dim,  and half  veiled  in smoke.  Barliman  Butterbur  was "
     'Then she sent me no message?' said Gimli and bent his head. 
"rock;  or drownd  yourself, like a hobbit in a  river. But  neither rock nor  "
""
real peril  yet; but  you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was last  
""
"tree that had anyone in it. These they guarded too, while all the rest (hundreds and "
"longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road "
for here was  yet another company of orcs on  the  march. Or so  at first he 
"Cotton. They sat with  the family in the warm kitchen, and the Cottons asked "
     I listen for returning feet 
catch you and eat you. They're coming!' 
So  they  came  to  a  dead  stop. Gollum  had  brought  Bilbo  to  the way  out  after 
"Israel Bremmer,4041376643939058,08-04-1989
"
rippling  like silver.  And  so they came  before the Gateway and  halted  a  
"many-pointed  stars. This  was the livery of the heirs of  Elendil, and none "
surprised.' 
A whirl of bats frightened from slumber by their smoking torches flurried over 
"far under; there Saruman had treasuries,  store-houses, armouries, smithies,  "
"Then I swooned  and was made  captive. I saw him no more, and know  no "
"power  of Orthanc  cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real "
"####-cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts "
"     He took Pippin's hand and bent over his face, listening for his breath; "
"weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to see what would "
"     'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very  desperate, but I believe Frodo "
"world for the momen t he  felt only joy, great joy. The burden  was gone. His "
"understand?  Everything!'  He cowered on the floor again with bowed head, as "
"to  the Brandywine, and  they found  the way  barred. At  either  end of the "
"hardly  help myself.  I  seemed to be drawn  somehow.  Anyway,  I  went, and "
""
"     'Jowyn, Jowyn!' cried Jomer amid his tears. But she opened her eyes and  "
Pippin that a  pale light was spread about it and the heavy shadows gave way 
is it at? Seeking a way  up behind  the Curtain to our hidings?  It seems we 
Desperately  he tried to turn and stab his enemy. But Gollum  was too quick. 
"like a dry branch that has been thrust in  a fire; and as  he watched it, it "
     'Behold the  Sun setting in  a  great fire! It is a sign of the end and 
"     'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise "
into the wood. 
steed. But far  worse than all  such  perils was the ever -approaching threat 
So it  was  that Legolas  and  Gimli  found him.  They came from the western 
     In Imladris it dwells; 
"####-he  heard two noises; one loud, and the other  soft but very  clear. One was "
"only the old P®kel -men were left, still sitting at the turnings of the road. "
ominous they stood upon either  side of the  stream. A  narrow  gap appeared 
     O Lurien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore 
"     'Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?' "
"Jessee McBrearty,4725794797550500,08-02-1990
"
"     'You'll run with me  behind you,' said Ugl®k. 'Run! Or you'll never see "
wove about himself. Frodo was lying on his back not moving. Sam stood 
"A  pang  of  fear  and  loss,  like  an  echo  of  Gollum's  misery,  smote  Bilbo,  and "
"western bank, following Aragorn's boat ahead, which had already moved out of "
he had already sold it - to the Sackville-Bagginses!  
"Dwight Campana,4041597305652214,04-02-1998
"
care whether Gollum heard him or  not. `We've got to get some sleep; but not 
"Rina Parrott,4041370376047049,23-12-1977
"
nostrils:  evidently  a   tracker  of  some  kind.  The  other  was   a  big 
"     Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan, "
myself  long ago without  so much trouble. I have  thought several  times of 
"     'Then I bet it wasn't an inch. What he saw was an elm  tree, as like as "
ran on. 
"by water. Still elves are light–footed, and though they were not in these days much "
"had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came striding up. Aragorn, Gimli "
"pale deadly fire began steadily to glow within, a flame kindled in some deep "
they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of  the Deep and were 
"in the ancient days of  Gondor they were not needed, for  they had the Seven  "
were  forced  to  go  the  slower way  by  foot;  but  great  store  of  goods he sent ahead 
"Over grass and over stone, "
"Bertha Instrell,4017954640022464,13-07-1993
"
"Barad-dyr, since the Dark Lord  rose in power again, had  he ever   journeyed "
     He called her by her elvish name; 
passed us by under the full light of day.' 
"as  lightly as ever,  his feet hardly seeming to press the grass. leaving no "
"     Muttering Jothain retired, and spoke to  the others. Soon they drew off "
"it,  and began to cross  it. To their surprise they came upon dark pools fed "
"     `So it is,' they answered.  `But we call it   lembas or waybread, and it "
     'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell?  
"Janella Middleditch,4017954570964537,13-10-1985
"
""
####-Those were happier times. Now let us go!' 
into this tale) and getting ready to come in search of Thorin's company. But Bilbo 
"great  wonder. And before  he went to his rest he sent for Gimli  the Dwarf, "
"Sammie Dwelly,4041373893718,18-09-1995
"
     'The Ring! The  Ring!'  they cried with  deadly voices; and immediately 
in  the  hands  of  the  besiegers  burned  in  their  thoughts;  also  they  guessed  the 
"     At first  Frodo  was a  good deal  disturbed,  and wondered often  what "
"and we must have some music first. Now to clear up!"" "
"longer  forget  the Great  River.  As  some of you  know well, it  cannot be "
suppressed  sneezes.  Very  soon  there  was  a  fine  commotion  in  the  village  by  the 
"offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and something "
"     'But, Lord Faramir,' said Frodo bowing, `you have not yet declared your "
"Benedict Melmar,4365146235066604,01-06-1975
"
"     'He  is  dead then,' said  Frodo. `I feared it was  so.' Gimli cast his "
 
"     At last the old man  broke the silence.  'Well met indeed , my friends,' "
"remains for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth, wise-woman of  "
""
     'And  yet you  counselled  me  not  to adventure on the road that I had 
"####-secrets of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would  teach "
"Minni Phetteplace,4041593410079,30-01-1995
"
your  side with Sam each day. But as for  the feast` I don't go in  for such 
as the darkness closed  again  there came rolling over  the fields  a  great 
"Worden Marquez,4041375787546729,25-10-1985
"
"Jemimah MacAnespie,4438153274103,22-04-2000
"
"his speed, and the front of the first jored roared like a breaker foaming to "
"called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have "
"chief  servants. So much  they  told him when he  forced  them, but he guessed  there "
"     `Believe  not that in the land of Gondor the blood of N®menor is spent, "
while.' 
have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. I 
"for Merry, and Sam,  and Pippin,  but free and alive  himself. Gandalf would  "
Lossarnach. That is where  my grandsire  lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old 
####-enemy came on. 
in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring. 
"Nealy Caldera,4041593298672,22-01-1975
"
"Elendil's  heir, behind him rode the lords of the  House of Eorl the  Young. "
"     Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was closing "
"But  before they could  say anything, she  sprang  lightly up  and  over the "
"their work, while both  the  White Tree and the  Golden were  in flower!' He "
with me.' 
and 
"dwarves' excited questions. ""It is a plan of the Mountain."" "
"quite  lost  count,  and  it  might  have  been  one  night  or  a  week  of  nights  for  all  he "
"Madelena Heis,4041379898513,03-02-2000
"
a ruined town. Many had gone east and south; and some  of these had  crossed 
"Stick -at-naught  Strider,  that is!  Though  I've  heard other names not  so "
"they had to go on and on, long after they were sick for a sight of the sun and of the "
"flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear  voice  of Goldberry singing "
"chance.  Strike wherever the  enemy gathers. Other plans we cannot make, for  "
didn't know that I had... ' 
Come haste! Come haste! across the waste! 
"     So  they  passed into  Eregion,  and at last  a  fair  morning  dawned, "
"Rulers try to stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with, I said. They "
"the dwarves, a ring which they kept from spreading outwards; but it closed slowly "
"     'I wonder,' said Frodo. 'It's my  doom, I think, to go  to  that Shadow "
enchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was 
"""We are trapped!"" they groaned. ""This is the end. We shall die here."" "
"closed fast again.  A shudder ran  through  the tree  from root to  tip, and "
sides of the valley. 
Hoping  desperately  that Bilbo  had  not  been  caught  the  dwarves went  on. Not 
"again, and behind you  there are now secret sentinels  that you cannot pass.  "
"     'This  is good  tidings beyond hope,' said  the  sentinel. 'Hasten! The "
"     Suddenly he  heard the  tinkle of water, a sound hard and  clear  as  a  "
"Corrie Bounde,4041591767892,20-06-1976
"
"     'I will,' said Gimli eagerly. "
####- 
"and stooped swiftly down, speeding back to Mordor. "
"be made the tool  of other men's purposes, however worthy. And to  him there "
these? We who have lived long under the  Shadow may surely listen to  echoes 
"     'Our names and our business are our own,  and this does not seem a good  "
"that voice could seldom  report the words that they heard;  and if they did, "
"about  trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with  a bright sun,  and "
"longer,  and  there   will  be  people  and  fields  where  once  ther e  was "
"Opalina Del Monte,4041376950069,23-12-1995
"
heed to the defence. 
"Though  he  had done his best  to  think it  out,  what  he  was  doing  was "
"need drives me. Therefore, only of your free will would I have you come, for "
"     'Yes,  they will come. But  they have fought many battles at your back. "
"saw  before them a  low  cliff, some  five fathoms  high, with a  broken and "
Gondor:  mainly  copies  or  summaries of  histories or legends  relating to 
"lashing whips fell a torrent of black rain. And into the heart of the storm, "
"in his  chair: his  eyes gleamed in  the light of the  fire, which had  been "
looked back. 
"     for your watch hath not been in vain, "
"Bonnie Strathman,4017953817744710,20-01-1976
"
"Jesselyn Clarridge,4256689955171,10-06-1996
"
something has slipped. And we've got to  look out. Always the poor  Uruks to 
"enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.' He went off to gather fuel, "
"Francyne Featherstone,4827178026406444,20-03-1998
"
"brink, silent, gazing down. "
"eat,  if you can."" And that is the end of the story. Though I should like to "
peaks. 
"still  air.  Thin  strands  of river -mist  were hanging above the dikes, and "
passes leading into  the eastern land  beyond.  Along the crest of the ridge 
"Nickolaus Heard,4684118359840,11-07-1984
"
"Carey Wayland,4017950280297,19-07-1996
"
"Johanna Buffin,4041592030266,19-05-1988
"
and each thread was as thick as rope. 
"box, Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.' "
back into deeper shade. `He  stands  a fair chance of being spitted  for  an 
     `No! ' answered Aragorn. `Say rather that we will bear our boats by the 
"Darline Gerge,4017951373831897,18-02-1985
"
gnarled hands  between his knees.  The flicker for  a moment showed his sharp 
"There is a marshal over the Riders  of Rohan; and the Lord H®rin, I am told, "
"Chantalle Gallagher,4017959236819041,29-09-1998
"
of  the circle was a great grey wolf. He  spoke  to  them  in  the dreadful  language of 
"battle-fury of his fathers ran  like new tire in his veins, and he was borne "
outward and foamed down towards the valley. They flung their pale torches to the 
up  and  staggered  on  in  the  direction  which  eight  out  of  the  thirteen  of  them 
distance. He shut his eyes again and held on tighter.  
Angmar . 
crown rolled away with  a clang. Jowyn fell forward upon her fallen foe. But 
hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!' 
"     `And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn. `We "
"Bendix Illston,4017951610058023,28-05-1978
"
"     'I cannot,' said Gimli. `But  I am glad that the shadow came no nearer. "
Orcs 
"Fabio Edis,4915605570105,28-10-1996
"
"Rebekah Whellans,4509802884494342,12-01-1985
"
"ringing of bells. But the hosts of Mordor wer e seized with bewilderment, and "
     'Remember that! For you  are  now  sworn to his  service. I do not know 
as a dark shape sprang  over him. He  lay still  and for a  moment  all went 
"     'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was a  "
"Oneida Relph,4017957460249,25-07-1995
"
"or the small doings of  their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers,  "
"into one another, and bobbing away down the current. "
content?' 
Stone-houses; before Tall Men come up out of Water.' 
me -- but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.' 
"Dorena Dziwisz,4129118099990721,05-04-1998
"
"thrush-language."" "
"and  at the  same time kept up their  connexions with Rohan and  Gondor, the "
"short way beyond the  way-meeting,  after another  steep  incline,  a flying "
"taught them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill -luck fall into any danger  "
"####-hasten. Time is  short.  See! The beacons of Gondor are  alight, calling for  "
the care of his friends.' 
"You'll wish there was more  that  you could tell to  satisfy the Questioner, "
"     Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, and "
"They halted  suddenly  on the  edge,  and  peered  through the  tree-trunks, "
help that you promised.' 
"were silent, uttering no cry, the dread of them could not be shaken off. "
"took us, he was my guide.' "
"he gained-well, you will see whether he gained anything in the end."
and chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which their 
as webs of hide between horned fingers; and it stank. A creature of an older  
"####-     Then all the Captains  of  the West cried aloud, for their hearts  were "
"clamour of leaves,  as soon as the  words left his mouth. He felt desperate: "
"Lydon Bynold,4041590334100586,01-05-1997
"
"     'The trail is straight, and turns  neither right nor left, as far as my "
"packed. It was impossible for Frodo  to  walk, so  they divided the  greater  "
I shall certainly come. 
They  saw  the  little  dark  shape  of  the  hobbit  start  across  the  floor  holding  his 
"West. Upon the out-thrust spurs forts and towers were built, and watch-fires "
Then for  the first  time  the Master was surprised and a  little frightened; and he 
ground beneath them tremble. 
there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell 
     'Good-bye!'  said  Merry.  He could find no more to say.  He  felt very 
"     `If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors  open  outwards.  "
"and  the  North  Road  was now  seldom  used: it was  grass-grown,  and  the "
"food,  but  we  don't  rightly  know what  becomes  of  it.  It's all  these "
     Sam knelt beside  him  and peered  reluctantly over the  edge.  Then he 
"Battle  Gardens  was thought  of,  or Better  Smials.  But  after a while in "
their hoods were ca st now over helm  and head. Their  horses were strong and 
into  a  hill.  Men believed that the Orcs whom they had  slain  were buried 
"Go back and trouble not the valleys ever again! Depart and be at rest! "" "
"pulled such  a  grim face  that the boy stepped  back a pace, but at once he "
"Stormy Phillippo,4041372343122764,31-05-1990
"
gave forth a  faint sickening charnel-smell; an  odour  of rottenness filled 
     Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up 
knees. 
"find that brooch. I should hate to lose mine, but I am afraid  yours is gone "
"Irene Krysztofowicz,4041599834918,19-01-1980
"
"king at  Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the Shire. But "
eleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much in 
"they seemed deeper and less  leisurely,  and every  now  and again one great "
"'Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but I didn't know as anything grew in Mordor! But if I "
"     `We  shall all be scattered and lost,' groaned Aragorn. `Boromir!  I do "
blazing ligh t. 
mayhap things would have  gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I 
     He  looked on  the bright point of the sword. He thought  of the places 
"     'So we always do.' he  said, as they sat down: `we look towards N®menor "
"Not if some better way can be contrived? "" "
"     'A time may come  soon,' said he, 'when none  will return.  Then  there "
I'll be obliged.' 
'But mighty indeed was  Aragorn that day. Lo! all the black fleet was in his 
"Steward of the realm, to  speak and to be silent,  to do and  to let be,  to "
the end. It can't be altered. You can't come between me and this doom.' 
use  on  the  mountain-side? Not much use  in  the  forest? Bless me! Had you never 
light and shadow. He has no fear. Tom Bombadil is master.' 
them had come down from the mountains and settled in the woods not far from the 
     Frodo passed his hand over his brow and wrenched his eyes away from the 
"     'I don't know,' answered  Frodo. 'I fear those  Black Riders, and  I am "
"Tonia McMorran,4579296580522347,14-10-1993
"
"cousin Frodo! You can  keep your  secret for the present,  if you want to be "
"furrier  again  as  long  as  you  are  within  a  hundred  miles  of  his  house,  nor,  rug, "
stuck up here with  nothing but  the  dead  flats between me and that Shadow 
struggled on for maybe twenty yards. Then he pitched down into a shallow pit 
went back to bed and slept till late morning. 
"Minas Morgu l, where his Nine servants dwelt, until  all  was  ready. Then he  "
     The others  too  now  turned their  eyes eastward.  Over the  sundering 
took heart to see him unbent and unafraid. 
"Blakelee Blaxeland,4041590759924,01-04-1998
"
"in stone, memorials of forgotten  things now  lost in  unpeopled  lands. For "
"captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?' "
"his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone to Isengard, or I "
"     'And if any will bear him,' said Jomer. "
"on now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!' "
"me,  as  you  used.' He turned  away, and the  shadow  passed. He  seemed to "
Sam stood glowering over him. 
"many houses  of wood,  brick, or stone. These  were  specially  favoured  by "
chieftains  and meddled not at all with events in the world outside. To  the 
and made  their  camp under some stunted alder -trees  by  the shores of  the 
that are remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the 
"knights apiece. No, he will not smile.' "
"make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for?  They "
"Antoine Giorgielli,4041595555924721,25-03-1990
"
"Bracegirdle,  Brockhouse, Goodbody, Hornblower, and  Proudfoot began to "
"last meeting with Elrond  her father, for  they went up into the  hills  and "
"     Briefly Strider told of the attack  on their camp under Weathertop, and "
"path."" "
Thjoden. I spoke warily  before  my  men. It is true that  we are not yet at 
felt reluctant to give up the Ring and burden his master with it again. 
"yet horrible of shape, like the demented  forms in an uneasy dream; and they  "
"times and stages of their journey, but his memory was drowsy and uncertain. "
""
"Lucius Stodd,4041370654662915,30-06-2000
"
""
"both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can  all things, but these "
"adventures to see it, and now he did not like the look of it in the least. "
"drainage. Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an  ordinary corner  of "
"burned, dead lay the King of Rohan in their citadel,  and the  new king that "
"dragon passed like an  express train,  turned a  somersault, and  burst over  "
"must not detain Your Magnificence any longer,"" he  said, ""or keep you from much "
wonder if  we can see anything from this ledge which  will help us to  guess 
and the two Towers of the Teeth tall and dark upon either side. For in their 
"Miles Fishburn,4041374630796482,27-12-1986
"
the mouth  of the tunnel; and he thought he could see or  guess where  Frodo  
"Fanny Cornborough,4041373071244127,07-12-1976
"
but that curious matter is dealt with in this book. 
"North, where great watch was  now kept since the tidings of Moria  that  the "
"####-different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind  of way.  I know  we are going  to "
"Dana Lehemann,4306428565868680,13-08-1983
"
that preceded it. It was begun soon after The  Hobbit was written and before 
revealed white  for a moment in the light of the dying fire;  but for a long 
"heavily cloaked  stood beside him, and behind them in the mist loomed a wall "
"thought Mr. Baggins, who was  feeling  positively  flummoxed,  and was  beginning "
"     In a  chair, at the far side of the room  facing  the outer door, sat a  "
"not  be any  comfort  to us, if  these riders discover that we are  not Orcs "
"     'Seems almost too easy  after all, don't it?' said Cotton.  'I said  we "
"or I hope  that I may so take your words,'  he said.  'And  here is  another  "
"stump,  and  we're  at the  bottom.  Just  as  nice a little stair for  that "
"What brings Mister Baggins, "
"under  the  sunlit sky, and he cared not that they stood high upon the walls "
"left  the river Entwash wound, a silver thread in a green floor.  No  moving "
     The hobbits now left the tunnel -gate and rode across  the  wide hollow.  
     When Durin woke and walked alone. 
"city, yes, very nasty place, full of  enemies. We shouldn't have taken Men's "
carved in the likeness of a  horse's  head;  beneath was  a  wide basin from 
"they went  on  their way at their leisure, setting  up their tents when they "
"in war, my line too is  ending, even the House  of the Stewards  has failed. "
desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.  
     But I at last with weary feet 
     As  they  came  to the gates Cnrdan the Shipwright came  forth to greet 
""
"     'He looks  as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a  "
     So King Thjoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to  the  great 
when you see me! I shall  slip in quietly.  I  shan't often be visiting  the 
"dwarves, hurrying along on business of their  own, and with no help  and few "
When he got back Balin and Dwalin were  talking at  the  table  like old  friends 
"     swift in anger, quick to laugh; "
different.  They  heard the  gentle remonstrance  of  a kindly  king with an 
should bear was chosen for him by his own people. 
"     O Lurien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day; "
"fear and enmity. Then  suddenly, clasping the Ring in one clenched  fist, he "
"under the window,  but over it a black  orc-shape was straddled. It raised a  "
"Drew Adan,4041375573303277,07-12-1980
"
"him. 'Yes, yes, we heard the name once. But what does the name matter to us? "
country where they had lived had been ravaged. That  seemed  to the  hobbits 
Some  of  them  actually  sat  down  and  laughed.  Others  waved  their  spears  and 
was set with silver stars  about hem and  throat. Faramir had  sent for this 
should stand between.' 
into many plumes and billows; the valley of  the Withywindle. The stream ran 
"every man h part. Valour in  arms is yours, and you win high honour thereby. "
There was excitement  in  the camp  that night.  In  the morning  they prepared  to 
####-<h4>Chapter 19</h4> <br> 
     'What then?' said Legolas. 'Would  you  have her speak openly to you of 
our guide.' 
they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them. He  listened and 
"On that stony  plain  there was no cover,  and across it ran the highways of "
There  came  a  night  when  suddenly  there  were  many  lights  as  of  fires  and 
terror the servants fled and followed Gandalf.  
hobbit  strolled  along  contentedly.  He  mopped  his  face  with  a  red  silk 
Quickly  Bilbo  explained.  They  all  fell  silent:  the  hobbit  standing  by  the  grey 
"ended the  Battle of Bywater, 1419, the last battle fought in the Shire, and "
to the last arrow.  
"Moon, Master, down to the ruined city by the shores of the River. The ruined "
back; and only  those who knew  him well and were  near to him saw  the pain 
"     'I daresay,' growled Gorbag.  `But in the meantime enemies  have got up "
"a  flight of steps, fifty or more, to a  lower level. At the moment that was "
"     Presently,  groping  and fumbling  in  the  dark, they  found  that the "
"floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen  near the entrance "
"The  poor  little  hobbit  sat  down  in  the  hall  and  put  his  head  in  his  hands,  and "
"     At length they were once more aware of a wall looming up, and once more "
"Gaelan Marley,4041597338441379,27-11-1993
"
either side.' 
"great-great-great-granduncle once, Bullroarer Took, and —"" "
"The people of the woods did not delve in the  ground like Dwarves, nor build "
"here and could hear  all  about it.  It would have  made  him laugh, The cow "
"left  breast  as  he  flies  and  turns  above  you!"" And while Bard paused  in wonder  it "
Shadow. 
and  seek my own sword!  Grnma has it in his keeping. Bring him to  me also. 
"threat  of  war.  Then,  lowering in the mountains,  and gathering its great "
the soil of the Shire is deep. Still there are things deeper and higher; and 
"their eyes, after so long  a time in the dark, it seemed dazzlingly  bright, "
Puzzled  but  cheered.  Bilbo  hurried  on.  He  was  guided  to  a  safe  ford  and  set 
""
"     In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words grew "
"perils, and our hands are more often upon the bowstring than upon the harp.  "
affairs  of the  four villages  were their  chief concern. Occasionally  the 
"at the  roots, black above  where it merged into the  billowing canopy  that "
"water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with  it. "
shape his plans for himself  or his companions. Your judgement was postponed 
"palfrey rode Arwen his daughter, Evenstar of her people. "
had  come close  under  the Shadow  before  ever  he  rode to battle on  the 
slipped down the ladder. In a  minute  his head reappeared. He threw  a long 
"sick,' said Sam. Frodo did not speak. "
"scuttling  behind  tree-trunks.  There  were  queer  noises  too,  grunts,  scufflings,  and "
"""Well,  here  is  Mirkwood!""  said  Gandalf.  ""The  greatest  of  the  forests  of  the "
they set  out or  where they  were going to;  and he  did not  ask  for  any 
"deep rut worn in  ages of  passage,  running  now gently up in a long trough "
"Gare Shapero,4041375005047351,16-07-1981
"
"defend the Mountain against all approach, it could scarcely have done more. "
Before  long they had  all passed and  vanished. The sun rose till it neared 
"peering  at  him. As  suspicion  grew  in Gollum's mind,  the  light  of  his  eyes  burned "
     The  Riders laughed. 'It cannot be doubted  that we witness the meeting 
"'Black Riders!'  thought  Frodo as  he wakened, with the  sound of the hoofs "
Enemy's devices  oft serve us in his  despite.  The accursed darkness itself 
"Westward, to his  right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of the mountains,  "
he asked the question that was troubling him most. 
"cried to others within  to come  and see the Prince  of the  Halflings,  the "
""
and  rocky  walls were  already  starred  with  saxifrages  and  stonecrops.  
Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of  the Long Winter and the famine  that 
"if Master knows how to find them, I don't.' "
"Hound of Sauron! ' he cried. `Gandalf is here.  Fly, if you value  your foul "
"flying darkness in  the shape of a  monstrous bird, passed  over Edoras that "
"mortally afraid of Sting, and dared not come very near, now that it had come back. "
 
""
"they hastened night  after night  through  the mountains,  and  came  thus  at  last on  a "
"could  be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs,  and in their midst, taller than "
"     There the hobbits sat under the  cover  of  the  thorny bush, while the "
"Tirith, a city in the South.' "
speech. `Look! The king has got a crown again!' 
threads. He managed by  leaning over  to cut most of  the strong sticky  threads  that 
live.  Gondor and  Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy  is strong beyond our 
"     `Maybe,' said  Gimli;  `and  I  thank you  for  your words.  True words "
the Road ran  out again from the end of the tunnel into  the open.  There at 
twilight. Rauros was roaring with a grea t voice.  Already  night was laid on 
####-####- 
"     'Because I come seldom but  when my help  is needed,' answered Gandalf.  "
his lord's will.' 
"something cheering out of one Beorn's wooden bowls!"" "
"this time.  'Did you hear what they  said  about  that gobbler, Mr.  Frodo? I "
wondered  if  Thorin  was  after  all  really  a  descendant  of  the  old  kings.  He  had 
"     'No more can I say than I have said,' answered Frodo. `Though your tale "
     'So this is the thief!' said Gandalf.  Hastily  he cast his  cloak over  
"dragging him down again. As soon as the great  Cross-roads  had been passed, "
hold you at his own command. But you will be welcome. And it will be well to 
"seemed  to give him confidence, though he  shut his eyes more than once when "
"spiders  all  right.  But  they  were  only  small  ones  of  ordinary  size,  and  they  were "
"Splash  it  fell  in  the  water!  ""Not  far  enough!""  said  Bilbo  who  was  peering "
devour the high seat. What is to be done?' 
"memory.  But  Aragorn  stood  up as one refreshed, and his eyes smiled as he "
those whose business  took  them  to  the  borders  saw strange  things. The 
"the hilt, and said slowly after Denethor: "
will  gladly put you  down  on  your  feet  when  blows  begin; or Shadowfax 
gathered and marshalled;  and out of the City  came all the  strength of men 
"     'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself "
"     'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over  his shoulder, and he hurried "
"Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he "
"in Sam's bag of Faramir's provision: some  dried fruit, and a small  slip of "
"healed  in  Rivendell  of the  knife-stroke,  that grim  wound had  not been "
whom 
"the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ever done so, nor has "
     In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to 
"Betsy Lowle,4017950453981705,01-08-1997
"
"can be off!"" He laughed a great rolling laugh, put down his axe and came forward. "
"mighty piers of many-sided stone were  welded  into one, but near the summit "
""
"a house, but  tonight we  will do as the Galadhrim  and seek  refuge  in the "
"Entwives were not there. Long  we called, and long we searched; and we asked "
""
####- 
"     'Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find.  And there "
"Eveleen Cromley,4041593258890,12-02-1998
"
""
"feet.  He bent over Frodo, rousing  him gently.  Frodo groaned; but  with  a  "
"utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We "
bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.' 
     At last all  was over.  Nearly  seventy of the ruffians lay dead on the 
"and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into  his heart, and he "
"River, though we kept a  foothold there and  strength of arms. But this very "
when  he heard that Gandalf  had never  appeared. It really  depends  on two 
crawled to the opening and peered  down. He was almost certain that he could 
"hear him snuffling, and now and again there was a harsh  hiss of breath that "
the  Lady  Jowyn of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many  knights of  the 
####-agony had rolled away from him again; yet he was the bane of his master. 
"     Soon there  was great peril of fire behind the wall,  and all who could "
hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need?' 
     They camped  beside  the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and 
"the  cleverness  of  his  conversation  with  Smaug,  but  his  mistake  at  the  end  shook "
"the servants  of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not in Mordor "
"When they came at last to the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out. "
"it. Still there's seldom  less  than a score  round the  Boss, as they names "
"     Inside it was filled with a grey  dust, soft and fine, in the middle of "
"narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.' "
"There have been many  lords in the green fields in my time, and I have never "
"Leora Bessett,4017953034311,25-02-1981
"
became  of that poor  pony. He's  been on my mind many a time and the wolves 
"Caz Hartman,4501513062158801,15-04-1994
"
Three were  carried away by the first assault  of the flood; the others were 
His  heart  beat slowly. Time  seemed poised in  uncertainty. They  were too 
"     'If I'm  to  go on,' he  said,  `then  I must take your sword,  by your "
"feel  was fairly dry and sheltered. When  they came to make their meal, they "
"Overhead there hung a heavy  roof, sombre and  featureless, and light seemed "
now.  And what do you want with me?  It must  be pressing.  You were never a  
touch of his hand. 
"even  as  the  Captains were about to  turn  away, the  silence  was  broken "
"     To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell "
last Pippin ventured to speak again. 
"branches. `There was something in this tree that I have never seen  before,' "
     The night  was old  and the East grey  when  they rode  up at last from 
"     `Gollum's doing, I'll be bound.' said  Sam to Frodo. `And  a nice place "
looking out upon the vale. 
when  they find your trail upon the Road  they will   ride after us  like the 
"     `I was  not  sent to beg  any boon, but to  seek only the meaning  of a  "
"you, special orders or no? What are you for?' "
"cannot get out,' muttered Gimli. 'It was  well for us that the pool had sunk  "
"Tower can contrive, and never  be released,  unless maybe when he is changed "
returned to  report  it. Most Hobbits regarded even  rivers  and small boats 
"saved to Shadowfax,  and  they were  graciously accepted,  though the  horse "
"wonderful  animals,  as  they  had  been  all  day.  Of  Beorn  they  had  seen  and  heard "
 
and sea -birds crying whose race had perished from the earth. 
by road: it  would be safer  to  wait here than  that.  If  I go through the 
"behind, safe and comfortable, I shall find  wandering more bearable: I shall "
"the  globe where  it lay.  'But  you, Pippin!  This is a  grievous  turn  to "
"you  remember  something about me. You seem  to  remember my  fireworks kindly, "
     Here they washed  themselves and  drank  their  fill at  the in-falling 
""
may find friends upon your way when you  least look for it. I will send  out 
""
"fine chain, and then  sealed it, and addressed it  to Frodo. At first he put "
"Odella Lomasny,4285715154343,27-10-1998
"
Mountains of Mist and the forest at their feet. 
quite ready to go on another journey. Are you coming?' 
"behind him stood the Lord of the City, tall and fell; a light like flame was "
"     The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the upper steps,  "
"'Hullo, hu llo!' he jeered. 'Now who's arrested who?' "
break his  heart  with joy. And  never in after years could  he  hear a horn 
"now shall refill  the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda,  the  Queen of "
indeed 
"had  been  set  in order,  and Merry and Pippin came over  from  Crickhollow "
     Her voice as falling silver fell 
the cave. 
ever  reappear. At  last he  groped  for  Frodo's  hand.  It  was  cold  and 
"     And all  the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their merriment "
"     'Not a ""short cut"", I hope,' said  Pippin.  'Our last short cut through "
     'This  is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the  Guard.' said 
"     `That is the  purpose for which you are  called hither. Called, I  say. "
"forward, walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot. "
"Abdel Edson,4502648558923,08-10-1985
"
####-     Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.  
"his chance of peril, for  though  he has done as well as his fortune allowed "
killed before the rest drew off and left Bombur to Bilbo. 
the White Rider met again  upon the green  grass beside the  Deeping -stream. 
new mill to do than for the  old. But since Sharkey came they don't grind no 
"lot of Men, ruffians mostly,  came with great waggons, some to carry off the "
"come from Moria, the peril cannot  be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go "
"westward passed  low overhead,  a  great  welter of cloud and smoke now  lit "
     amid their branching hair. 
"     'Yes, he will  come,'  said  Gandalf, 'even  if  he comes too late. But "
"Paul Blenkiron,4618539388277,07-05-2001
"
"""Thank you very much I am sure,"" said Bilbo with a bow. ""But I don't think I "
"Clarisse Monnelly,4017955758321341,03-10-1983
"
histories and  legends. By the  end of the  first century of the Fourth  Age 
"     They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was further  "
"Zabrina Kinnett,4041590326104,08-04-1977
"
"deserves another."" It  would  have been  a  sharper lesson, if  only you had "
""
might have fallen into the  hands of the Enemy. Indeed  it certainly  would; 
"Darcey Bridgeland,4041592529516436,21-09-1983
"
"Lyndel Teresia,4041595318096007,07-07-1979
"
"lad, don't  forget Gildor's  saying  --  the one Sam  used to quote:  Do  not "
of Battle Plain  to the passes of Mordor. But now it isn't possible  for you  
modified by the war that began in 1939 or its sequels.  
"     'Well, one  can't be everywhere  at once, I  suppose,'  he said. 'But I "
     It was night. On either side of the  road the  host of Rohan was moving 
"Godwin Russo,4617809945725,21-10-1978
"
"of it. His head on its long  neck  was ever turning this way and that, while "
it 
slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day  was broad upon the 
"songs.  But,  why  O  People?""-and  here  the Master  rose  to  his  feet  and  spoke  very "
going to find hats and clothes expensive.' 
"It seemed quite a fair size, but not  too  large and mysterious. It had a dry floor "
####-was brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64 . 
"     ' 'Do not let me fall!' I gasped, for I felt life in me again. 'Bear me "
am commanded  to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of  the 
swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines  through you. Indeed  I do 
"the steps  like a goat, while bewildered goblins were still picking up his nice brass "
the dark. 
     beneath the Hill of Ilmarin  
"the time  comes, and if you  then desire it. If your hurts grieve you  still "
master  at all.  He isn't hesitating about which way  to  go. Of course not! 
""
"I had known all the  mischief he had caused, I should  have stuffed my pouch "
"     'I do not doubt  it,'  said Legolas.  'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves "
"daymeal, and such mirth as there still may be, about the hour of sunset. "
"Stephanus Broomhead,4017955752936623,29-05-1992
"
"kinswoman  from  the country,  for a single trumpet rang, and a dead silence "
"see him, I do pity him.' "
"He  peered  in,  and  shrank  back.  ""But  we  durstn't  go  in,  precious,  no  we "
"     'No, Sam!' said  Frodo. 'Do not kill him even now.  For he has not hurt "
words were shouted from many sides; and some of those who had before sung the 
     Chapter 2   The Council of Elrond   
"down to Osgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs  of "
over the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.  
"came to a small flat  landing cut in the stone  and  lit  by  the pale  sky, "
the  ba nner of  the  Tree and  Stars.  Upon the other hill hard by stood the 
steps. 
subterranean Entish malediction. 'Some  time ago I began to wonder  how Orcs 
larger blaze leapt up. 
touched her hand as he bent to look more  closely on her. 'Men of Rohan!' he 
"Kynthia Sharpless,4017957490246,20-07-1986
"
discovered that his  arm was  already nearly as useful again as it ever  had 
"being  now  driven  to the brink, turned at  bay,  and they were  fierce  in "
cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They  appeared first after  
I took it too literally –1 have been told that dwarves are sometimes politer in word 
"Clementia Doxey,4041370733727515,10-04-1988
"
     'Do  you feel any  need to  leave the Shire now  - now that your wish to 
"Maure Haye,4041376730172,24-11-1983
"
"""I  am  sorry.  I  mean,  I  should  have  liked  to  see  them  again,""  said  Bilbo "
"     After so long  journeying  and  camping, and  days spent ¤n  the lonely "
"striving to keep up the  pace set by  the Orcs, licked  every now  and again "
going  to adopt Gollum as a guide: the problem of food. It  did not occur to 
"the Stone. And with that hideous memory he woke fully, and shivered, and the "
walked open-eyed in the light of this world. 
"Kendal Granger,4041596115378,26-02-2000
"
"turned to the  right, southward  more  or less, and splashed  along with his "
"'And as for counsel, to you I would  say that you are over -late in repairing "
there marched up an army of Easterlings  that  had  waited for the signal in 
broken. Great  waggons wer e standing in  disorder in  a field beaten bare of 
"     With  that Gandalf  returned to the others, who  were still standing by "
without need. 
"was  like Gollum,  he wouldn't  wake up  never  aga in.'  He  restrained  the "
"such stings at  their sides, or  it would have hurried away quicker. Bilbo came at  it "
 
Therefore it must  be shunned. It will be watched. Too  often the Elves have 
before occurred to any of  them  as one  of the  adventures  in which  their 
To claim our long-forgotten gold. 
"set here.  For it is said that, though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to "
'em:  the old  storage-tunnels  at  Michel Delving  that  they've made  into 
"his  hand in. He has  no captive to  send. He has no Stone to see  with, and "
"wreckage; but most of the wide circle was bare again, a  wilderness of slime "
dismay at losing him. Now began the most dangerous part of all the journey.  
"Ray Focke,4017958936254,19-02-1979
"
"####-backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did "
"     Gandalf was gone, and the thudding  hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the  "
"hiss  escaped  its teeth, a gasp of  pain or hate. Quick as a snake  Shagrat "
"Olenka Benninck,4041594006180223,27-06-1988
"
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in  the 
"woods. When the battle was  over, we  found  that Gollum was  gone, and  his "
"ceaseless vigilance. Stony-faced they were, with  dark  window-holes staring "
being specially chosen for a sweeping stroke by a goblin swordsman. 
creature descended  in true line through endless years from the models  used 
     'Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some 
vanished round the rocky turn. 
####-     'Stop him! Don't let him go! ' cried Pippin. 
of his mysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very 
his grey elven-cloak had melted into the twilight. 
"That  is  why  they  were  now  riding  in  silence,  galloping  wherever  the  ground "
a patter and a pitter.  
 
""
"Then  the  battle  began. Some  of  the  dwarves  had  knives,  and some had sticks, "
its way among the ruined walls and paving -stones of an ancient highroad. 
"a fire,'  he said. 'I  care  no longer for the  danger. Let the Orcs come as "
"Cairistiona Osbidston,4041375948213,14-08-1994
"
guess. Not more.' 
"late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go now to  my  "
"folk  in Bree who  are  not to be  trusted,'  he went on.  'Bill  Ferny, for  "
Bilbo back  and go off tramping in the country with  him. I  love the Shire. 
move  once  more.  Only  Bofur  and  Bombur  were  left  behind  to  guard  the  ponies 
"Xaviera Smorthit,4017955466602,17-09-1990
"
"they were picked up  and carried down, down many steps, and round a  corner. "
"thought it, my father and I, for no tidings had we heard of Boromir since he "
     Even as they  spoke there came a blare  of trumpets. Then there  was  a  
was enormous when Thorin Oakenshield stepped in through the door.  
     With  a new sense of responsibility he  brought  his  eyes  back to the 
"Ira Shergold,4041590388617,20-10-1979
"
"the packing, and hoping against hope that his plan would come off. "
"Dodi Rawsthorne,4041379557969939,18-12-1998
"
"Ingaberg Butchart,4017952053478,21-01-1990
"
"Curt Bickerton,4132981649024134,17-06-1996
"
"the  trees  they  could  now  see  a  light  shining,  a  reddish  comfortable-looking light, "
"Jessalyn Riepl,4041595832973,30-09-1988
"
road climbed  upwards`  Frodo's spirits rose  a little;  but he  still  felt 
"trees. Before them  lay a  long  lawn of shining grass, studded  with golden "
Often they were just tied together like big rafts and poled or rowed up the stream; 
said so was sorry to find the presumption wrong. 
     Then  the  Black Captain rose  in  his  stirrups and  cried  aloud in a  
####-yonder in the north bank.  There are still  some  words  to speak before the 
"     Boromir laughed. `They did not expect this,' he said. `The fire has cut "
"broken and thrown back from their thousand  facets, but behind the glitter a  "
"exile. With  them he set  out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning "
till I turn for home. We'll hear anything on the road long before we meet it 
     Galadriel! Galadriel! 
"looked forward again, and hope fa ded. There seemed no chance of reaching the "
     They bowed to the ground. Then he  turned and without  looking back  he 
"blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes:  a king returning from exile to "
"him. Of course it was mostly food, and there was mighty little left for supper, and "
"""What  has  it  got  in  its  pocketses?""  he heard  the hiss  loud behind him, and  the "
"He  swerved aside to the right, and  dived out of the reach of his clutching "
"Bond Muirhead,4017959165310509,22-10-1997
"
the only guest without a gift.' 
"valley low scrubby trees lurked and clung, coarse grey grass-tussocks fought  "
"Nathanil Wallas,4041596170449,03-07-1975
"
"     `All is well,' said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. 'There is a  "
they stumbled  against them. The ground  became more broken  and walking 
"Good Smjagol comes. Now let's go, go quickly, yes. Through the  trees, while "
     We ride before the break of day! 
"throwing,  shooting  at  the  wand,  bowls,  ninepins  and  other  quiet  games  of  the "
"and these two cities  were ever at war, but Osgiliath  which lay between was "
"slowly now, and Gimli's back was bent.  Stone-hard are the Dwarves in labour "
above the  Ephel D®ath  in the West  the night-sky  was still dim and  pale. 
trembling hands. 'Can't you save Faramir?' 
different. At times the whole valley echoed. 
"very heavy, and I shall go still slower as we get nearer.' "
not speak  for some  time. Then  Frodo  breathed  a  sigh of  relief.  'It's 
"Ilsa Mattimoe,4017953260171,01-09-1984
"
"     The hobbits  felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening "
known the  danger of light and joy. Now I have taken my worst wound in  this 
"Lesli Stonner,4041596423988,11-02-1992
"
Only  Gimli lifted  up his head; a smouldering fire  was in his eyes. On all 
"and  poison-stained, stood like an obscene graveyard in endless rows, slowly  "
"and if they fell  behind, he  would turn and wait for  them. After a time he "
led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length to the high 
Eorl.  O worthy son of  Thengel the  Thrice-renowned! Why have you not  
became more and more unhappy and his foreboding 
     and dawn was in the air. 
     The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better  
try and save him. He kissed Frodo's forehead. `Come!  Wake up Mr. Frodo!' he 
"but the life did not return to his arm, and  he could not  raise or  use his "
The shelf  faced southward  and  eastward; but only on the east was the view 
the  doors  of Beorn's  house;  and  there  for  a while  they  both  stayed. Yule-tide was 
""
""
of the land of his home.' 
"Further away, not far from the river, where  it  came streaming out from the "
"doorway, where a great door, a stone door, was left standing open. "
"fair to see, but stricken, soon  to fall and die? Her malady begins far back  "
not look or feel at all like Bilbo's  description of Mirkwood.  That was all 
"counsel. I am sorry to rouse you from sleep, but will you come? ' "
"caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A  Barrow-wight had taken him, and he "
"with their backs  to the wall, fumbling for their sword-hilts.  There was  a "
"     'It  was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that "
####-would take them to the outer precipice. 
"Lancelot Whalley,4041595922423761,29-04-1992
"
"the mess as best you can yourselves. If we can only find him again, you will thank "
younger  hobbits wore the swords that they had  taken  from the  barrow; but 
There was nothing for it but to settle down for the night where they were; they 
"     'That we shall know if ever  we come to Erech,' said  Aragorn. 'But the "
"you under its deadly gaze, naked, immovable. So thin, so frail and thin, the "
"importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and  of Frodo his  heir, they suddenly "
"us in the wilderness,  they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves. It "
going had been heavy upon him from  the moment  he awoke; but he guessed 
"into  the  horrible,  horrible,  tunnels  and  look  for  his  friends.  He  had  just made  up "
Too wet for hobbit-folk - let them rest while they are able! It's a good day 
"this  side  of  the Mountain  to  bits,  if  necessary,  to  stop  up  our  entrance,  and  if  we "
the Fire and the destruction of the Burden. 
"gave way before us,  but  only feigned to flee,  and soon  after came to the "
many  a  day-became  like windows  in  a stone  wall: windows with  shutters 
"gasping  and  taking pleasure  in  the  feel of  the  fresh  air  again,  and hardly noticing "
"Mirkwood, and they were in despair.  "
asked him many questions. But Thorin would only say that he was starving. 
"     'Known?'  said  Gandalf.  'I  have known  much that only the Wise know,  "
"streams of youth, an old starved pitiable thing. "
"myself, and I will be avenged on anyone who finds it and withholds it."" "
"     Soon Strider  beckoned  to them,  and  the hobbits left  the bushes and "
"he was clothed in rags of grey or dirty white, and at his heels went another  "
A spasm  of anger passed swiftly over  the hobbit's  face again. Suddenly it 
nearer they get to the  Enemy's land the more like Stinker Slinker will get. 
"of the hollow.  The land  all about was  dreary, flat  and drab-hued. On the "
""
####-spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! ' 
"dragon  did  not  find  them  quite  unprepared.  Before  long,  so  great was  his  speed, "
"title page had many titles on it, crossed out one after another, so: "
from 
"that all things wept for Thjoden and  Jowyn, quenching the fires in the City "
versions of the simple diggings of old.  But suitable  sites for these large 
that moment Sam too lurched and fell forwards.  
was going into great danger.' 
"head  of  the  pass  we  took  refuge  in  a  cave,  the  hob  bit  and  I  and  several  of  our "
     and the little dog chased his tail. 
"     'Your quest is known to us,' said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. `But  we "
common to both were necessarily the most powerful influences. One has 
"     'Then you would have  us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol  Amroth, or to "
close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By  that time the whole of 
"He was  just  going  to  turn  and  go back, when  a black  shape  swooped  at him  and "
"""I  thought so  last night,"" he smiled  to himself. ""Lake-men, some nasty scheme "
"     Then at a  great distance, as if it  came out of memories of  the Shire, "
     that I shall never know.  
"     The Prince Imrahil brought  Faramir to  the White Tower, and  he  said: "
"mound, covered with  a sward of grass as  green as Spring-time in the  Elder  "
a  juggler's trick while others gape at it. For many the sound  of the voice 
     doom approaches. The Dead awaken; 
"Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day "
those words before.' 
"The sword is sharp, the spear is long, "
"     The lodging was   dark,  save  for a  little lantern  set  on the table. "
"there be in  truth  such paths, ' said Thjoden, 'their gate  is in Dunharrow;  "
"     Her mantle glinted in the moon, "
contained much that was later omitted or lost.  In Minas  Tirith it received 
     Pippin was sitting on his pack  in  the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo 
"     'What  do  they live  on  when  they  can't  get  hobbit?'  asked  Sam, "
"Ceil Jarrel,4041592078984,09-04-1977
"
"a  few  huts  and  buildings  there,  but  right  out  on  the  surface  of  the  lake,  protected "
"slain many  Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more use  here. We "
"Essie Kingsland,4041595647375635,19-05-1975
"
ground. Round  them  were many smaller  goblins. Pippin supposed that  these 
of him.' 
"but they forded the water without much difficulty, and found the ancient steps, and "
towards the East. 
     'They've cut it down!' cried Sam. 'They've cut down the Party Tree!' He 
"Sofia Pike,4041590555148157,07-12-1990
"
"Amroth, where in  happier days his high house was built. Here ever bloom the "
last lap of  the Road. At the same moment the  black horses leaped  down the 
but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is  their shape and way 
"suddenly you'll see it above you, and you'll want to hide.' "
"see the paler sky between them. The dark river opened suddenly wide, and there it "
""
so pleased them: for bringing away a cup and stirring up Smaug's wrath so soon. 
"     'But there's two of them. They'll wake too quick and kill  us,'  whined "
letters.  He was  mighty  book -learned was dear  old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote 
The  wizard  and  the  hobbit  pushed  open  the  heavy  creaking  gate  and  went 
"Noellyn Rouff,4017952144038,03-03-1987
"
     Gollum sent  out a  long  hiss  through his  teeth. He stood  up  for a  
"     'Yes, I will  - two eyes, as often as I can spare them.' "
     From gnashing of the Narrow Ice 
like small towns. One of the largest of these was right below them. Barely a  
are only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking.' 
that you will  find  it hard to mend or undo in your lives. And  it  will be 
"     `Yes,  yes,' said  Gollum. `But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully! Or "
"Linnea Venditti,4041597305032128,06-02-1978
"
"declining from N®menor to  Middle -earth. For as you may know, if  "
"Tobie Tuckey,4041370352916,07-06-1999
"
there was no need to come back to report that! 
us  hope  still  for  something  that  will  bring  reconciliation.  Our  advantage  in 
Hobbits in Bilbo's time preserved no  knowledge. A  love  of learning (other  
"####-he said.  'Would that Elrond were here, for he is the eldest of all our race, "
already  it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but  as they rode out from 
"it up.  Its white light quickened swiftly, and  the shadows under  the  dark "
"Feliks Hannabuss,4041590964151,22-06-1987
"
"your patience,' said Faramir.  `This is the  Window  of the Sunset,  Henneth "
     'Welcome to the  Treegarth of Orthanc!' he said. 'I  knew that you were 
Road runs along the edge of  the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the 
"orderly as the web of some huge spider,  but  denser -woven  and far greater,  "
"####-treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice;  and  in it lies a great "
"are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.' "
"will be  besieged,  and after a  brief and bitter time it will be destroyed. "
again!' 
drawing-room.  After  a  while  and  a  drink  he  crept  nervously  to  the  door  of  the 
"his hardihood, and to grace with  splendour  his faithful  brown hobbit-hand  "
that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours.  But  that's  a  long 
tyrant  and counsellor. When the plot  is ripe it remains  no longer secret. 
"very  fast.  When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a  "
"Rafi Stephens,4041597840964041,27-03-1995
"
"####-forgive your doubt,'  he said. 'Little do I resemble the figures  of Elendil "
looked very much as it always had done. 
"Carolan Cranfield,4865317968875,12-07-1995
"
the midsummer's eve. 
reckoning.' 
"and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot  "
"Marci Grammer,4133349819873152,20-01-1999
"
sooner than he would. Something has happened to stir him.' 
"Roch Lipmann,4133165541963966,22-02-1987
"
""
for another spring-this time to crush  and sting to death: no little bite of 
"The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered above them; the "
if  once  the  fortress  was manned  with  so  large  and  warlike  a  company.  They  had 
account of  himself at several  points:  what part  he  had  to  play in the 
"""Don't be a fool, Bilbo Baggins!"" he said  to himself, ""thinking of dragons  and "
the  land as if they  were searching for  something; and they  were steadily 
"Cindra Gunton,4308096696136,04-08-1981
"
while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of wind. 
"and hairs that stuck out like steel spines, and at each leg's end  there was "
 
"hands.  ""You  miserable  hobbit!  You  undersized-burglar!""  he  shouted  at  a  loss  for "
"more water, till all the fires were quenched and every cave filled. The fogs "
All that morning they were busy with preparations. Soon after midday they ate 
"further eastward,  and  Archet  on  the  edge of  the Chetwood.  Lying round "
"something  in her  softened, as though  a bitter frost  were yielding at the "
"ones out of  their bundles;  then they made their blankets comfortable, got out their "
and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor. Yet amid all 
stairs. 
"other parts  of the field. Then he  went in.  He took off his party clothes,  "
"""And  Thrain  your  father  went  away  on  the  twenty-first  of  April,  a  hundred "
Suddenly his voice came floating back to them in a loud halloo!  
"stood  up to return, he looked back up the  slope. At that moment he saw the "
this place while Faramir lives! Do nothing until Gandalf comes!' 
"taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.' "
     Grond crawled on. Upon  its housing no fire would catch; and though now 
     Now men came bearing  raiment  of  war from  the  king's hoard and they 
"cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden under brambles. "
of food and clothing for the  journey.  The food was  mostly in the  form of 
"####-about them and the  road behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter "
of sleep. Let your wrath at an old man's folly run off and then return to my 
"cursing and wailing away in the gloom, not very far off by the sound of it. He was "
"came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.  "
"     Hound is hungry, hare is fearful... "
"     `Very  well, I will take  it,' said  Frodo. Bilbo  put  it  on him, and "
"Caril Wardington,4017955107097725,28-01-1975
"
"more  bent on killing than escaping. Several hobbits fell, and the rest were "
Gandalf and  Bilbo  deep in  talk. `Hullo!  Good morning!' said Bilbo. `Feel  
hope. And therefore he is now  in great doubt. For  if we  have  found  this 
Tirith - when you are not on  duty. For there is another side to it. You are 
     Aragorn knelt beside him.  Boromir opened his eyes and strove to speak. 
"     'I don't know what  stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean the "
"     'Up  we go!' said Merry joyfully. 'Now for a breath of air, and a sight "
 
Whiteskins 
as if icy claws were  laid upon them.  The trees  and rocks about him seemed 
"statues on  either hand. There was no  sound. Some way ahead, a mile  or so,  "
"of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of  all  my journey, the road back, "
'Why didn't you speak up before?' 
"     'Coming, sir!' came  the answer  from far within, followed soon by  Sam "
"among  the spears of  the goblins. That would have been  the end of him,  though he "
     Let others follow it who can! 
"     'Here, my  lad, I'll take that!  I did not ask  you  to handle it,'  he "
"spears, keen-edged as  knives. Between  them was a narrow  space,  and there "
that  very place where  Pippin had looked  into  the Stone  of  Orthanc. The 
####-he slung it at his back.  Then he looked for his sword that he had let fall; 
"     Sam  nodded. 'I understand,'  he  said.  'But  I've been thinking,  Mr. "
late night.  They  went  on  for  a  mile  or  more northwards. Aragorn  was 
     there is a different green. 
"""Well,  if  you  really want my  advice,  I  should  say we  can  do  nothing  but  stay "
"rocky,  as the writhen hills  gathered  themselves  together and climbed up, "
"     `I  fear  he had  ill tidings to record in a  fair hand,' said Gandalf.  "
"lifted,  and its  nostrils were wide and red  as it neighed, smelling battle "
King. But the chief importance of  Findegil's copy is that it alone contains 
"and goblin war."" "
something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? ' 
"doubtful, if the assault were determined and in great force. The horses were "
"I brought up their ponies, and carried away the pots of gold, and buried them very "
"Temple Fullard,4050022255645934,08-03-1987
"
and it did  not daunt her now. Even as Frodo spoke he  felt  a great  malice 
     to his golden halls and green pastures 
     Gimli took  his arm and  helped  him down to a seat on the step.  `What 
"cousins  (on  the  Took  side),  who  had  been  a  great  traveller,  used  to  imitate  it  to "
"adventure,  and  with  a  knowledge  of  the  road  they  must  follow  over  the  Misty "
"out  and his will broke. On he toiled, up and up, turning this way and  that "
"fields. It moved with the speed of an arrow and grew as it came,  converging  "
where  we  are.  By  day  we  can  no  doubt  creep  out  safely  enough  to  take  the  air. 
to fetch them a 'bite'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies had 
"can make  them do so. He can, maybe, by his will choose what things shall be "
suddenly  announced that  he was going off  again next morning.  'Only for a 
with a knife. 
"####-""That's  right,""  said  Gandalf.  ""Let's  have  no  more  argument.  I  have  chosen  Mr. "
said Merry.  'He seemed rather grimly delighted  with the business  and  was 
"     Frodo  was  calling with a  weak voice. ,He  was not actually very  far "
"tents, 'that you should be armed for battle. I have  granted it, as I could. "
to climb  after him: he had learned the trick of clinging to boughs with his 
them so that they do not falter.' 
""
"strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he's only just gone. "
"""The  few  of  us  that  were  well  outside  sat  and  wept  in  hiding,  and  cursed "
"Little cheat. Not a fair  question. It  cheated first, it did. It  broke the "
"The dwarves, they heard the tramp of doom. "
I have  some skill as  a  hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving  
####- 
can't give no message. Good night to you!' 
"Augustine Hunstone,4041590601068,05-11-1998
"
of 
""
"were a Ring-bearer, if only  for a little while. Your  time may come. Do not "
"Pryce Ewbach,4041599256682182,27-10-1993
"
' 
 
"the people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the  City, or in the high "
"falls,  and the round wrinkles in  the glass make all  the  towers  bend and "
"####-""Aye, they'll make fine eating, when they've hung a bit,"" said another.  "
"cried. 'It is mine,  I say. Be off!' His hand strayed to his sword-hilt. But "
Then one of  the ponies  took  fright at nothing and bolted. He got  into  the  river 
if Osgiliath  is defended.  Let  us  not forget  the danger on our left. The 
"journey's end!"" That is the polite thing to say among eagles. "
go with  Boromir. And  yet what help could he or any of the Company give  to 
"Carr Cannicott,4017951076040325,31-07-1999
"
even  a visible Ent  to talk to in all the ruin;  and no  news. We spent the 
met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. He gave away 
befallen him. 
"     'You were less tender  to me,'  said Gluin with  a flash of his eyes as "
     'Why not make a new line?' said Pippin. 
king in the barrow; and you've got your beautiful mithril coat from  old Mr. 
This is what he sang: 
have gone to the battle' I should be ashamed to stay behind.' 
"twisted it,  curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That's why we tries to escape, "
"folk of the world begged  him, but he would not understand the need. And  if "
"     Sam  took a sip of water, but pressed Frodo  to  drink,  and  when  his "
noise. 
"     Frodo looked at the stone,  and wished that  Bilbo had brought home  no "
`Welcome Aragorn son  of Arathorn! ' he said. `It is eight  and thirty years 
direct  the  preparations  for  their  protection  and  housing.  Probably  most  of  them 
"""Excellent!""  said Gandalf, as he  stepped  from behind a  tree, and helped Bilbo "
Jowyn. 'And those who  have not swords can  still die  upon them. Would  you  
"After  that he  set out  to  explore. The  forest was grim  and  silent, but obviously "
"Allianora Cavil,4041597749548,06-02-1997
"
"war-horses, and  the  sudden singing of many men. The Sun's limb was lifted, "
     But after a while the air began to get  hot and stuffy. The  trees drew 
"nasty  jagged  stones  in  the  floor.  ""A  bit  low  for  goblins,  at  least  for  the  big  ones,"" "
"     'Coming along nicely,'  said  Merry.  'A  little  footsore, perhaps. We "
into it and not out of it.' 
"have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping, and you, Rosie.' "
"     A sudden  unreasoning  fear of  discovery laid hold  of Frodo,  and  he "
welcome your return.' 
"     `I can  take you to them,  sir,' said Sam. `It's a  big house this, and "
"all,' Pippin argued. 'That-glass  ball, now. He seemed mighty  pleased  with "
"lead  that  way, down to  Withywindle. Old grey  Willow-man, he's  a  mighty "
"Annemarie Foch,4041596717721971,26-06-1985
"
"smoothed  the  Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed  a thing not  made by the "
"     Frodo  turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf's "
"pretty  quick, if I put the Ring  on now, in Mordor. Well, all I can say is:  "
`What do you call him that for?' 
"'Lobelia again most likely,' he thought. 'She must have thought of something "
"Kristyn Eyden,4017951646990520,11-11-1990
"
course; but I did not expect to  meet it in  our  own Shire.  Can't a hobbit 
"but if you are not one of those men of the Lake, you had their help. They shall see "
"Sing we now softly, and dreams let us weave him! "
"moment  in silence. Then  his face grew  gentler, and the shadow  of a smile "
Bree-folk are still shivering and  expecting the end of the world. I got  up 
"might  say,  that  the Hill  at Bag  End was  full  of tunnels  stuffed with "
"     The Messenger put  these  aside, and there to the wonder and  dismay of "
earth. There was a brief  red flame that flickered under the clouds and died 
"get there, if we ever do? ' "
"having a little feast all to himself and his friend the captain."" "
"Angelica Hans,4041370447740,22-02-1976
"
"wandered round the familiar rooms,  and saw the light  of the sunset fade on "
had  pierced  its  throat. The  watching  eyes were  suddenly  extinguished. 
"but  the topmost course of the tower revolved slowly, first one way and then "
baggage-pony up this stair.' 
"Ichabod Uman,4041374755619,28-05-1978
"
"shadow. Now do not tell me, Gandalf, that I promised to keep him safe; for I  "
Travellers cut a great  dash in the Shire  with  their songs and their tales 
"     'Let the Orcs lie,' said Gandalf. 'The morning may bring new counsel.' "
"while  it  climbed  steeply.  That  slowed  Bilbo  down.  But  at  last  the  slope  stopped, "
"when some new lads come, I'll deal with you: I'll send you to Shelob.' "
"But  most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar, "
"     'I wish it need not have happened in my time,' said Frodo. "
""
"cheek, like  a  glistening rain-drop.  Her proud head drooped a little. Then "
"and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains, and "
"Sean Dibbe,4072287258151,07-06-1995
"
"magnitude of  his own folly was revealed to him in a blinding flash, and all "
"####-eyes. `I understand. But I can still help, can't I? I've got to get  you out "
####-suffer no living man to come to their  hidden halls;  but at whiles they may 
"into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we  shall soon be in "
"Lothlurien, "
word  to  come  from outside the  walls  was  brought by men flying down the 
""
"he  was  leaving  the  water  further  and  further  behind,  and  he  was  getting  afraid. "
two  or three  pieces.  The  taste brought  back  to them the memory of fair 
"faced south-west, set between the  ends of the  encircling  wall  that  here "
"they shouted,  and  kept on repeating  it  in chorus,  seeming  reluctant to "
to be getting late!' 
"     `Thank you very much,' said Frodo. "
"     'Do you indeed?' said Gandalf.  'Well, I do not. I have now a last task  "
"     At last Gandalf  halted  and beckoned to them; and they  came, and  saw "
Now Gandalf  too  said  farewell. Bilbo  sat on  the ground  feeling very unhappy 
####-still as if he had been turned to stone. 
Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. There are  many maps 
"prince long ago. It was of silver-steel which the elves call mithril, and with it went "
him 
more.' He paused and there was a heavy silence. Suddenly he turned his black 
"master may have something to say to you."" "
     Sea-kings' city in the South -kingdom 
"actual summit,  before  he looked  at last on the  path descending into  the "
"Abbe Horsell,4017957658222,17-07-1984
"
"heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and  many fell fla t on their faces. The "
Citadel and tell the chief of the Guard there what has befallen. It  will be 
"     Merry and Pippin  c limbed the gate, and the hobbits fled.  Another horn "
"Hirsch Juckes,4041375635342040,17-10-1988
"
did at the beginning of an expedition. 'And all  my  beautiful feather  beds 
in a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it. 
"     'I must go  a nd seek some arrows,' said Legolas. 'Would that this night "
"face  was less troubled. Then, by  our leave, lord, I must take new  counsel "
them now clearly in my heart. 
"prosperous,  and  Bilbo  Baggins  was  standing  at  his  door  after  breakfast  smoking "
and passed through the flowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of  
"     'Nay,  Jomer,  you  do  not  fully  understand   the  mind   of  Master  "
"under the shadows of the Ephel D®ath, and the sun was veiled. Frodo slept at "
"Dorelia Spittles,4017951650092,09-08-1998
"
leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand  none seem to  know.  It is likely 
live  at Bag End;  and the  hopes  of the  Sackville-Bagginses were  finally 
     Unwearied then were Durin's folk  
     Tall grows the grass there. In the wind from the Sea 
"rain  off  the  leaves,  and  the  drip,  drip,  was  most  annoying.  Also  the  mischief "
the devices of his enemies were at last laid bare.  Then his wrath blazed in 
for mastery. What w ill become of him? I  cannot say. I grieve that so  much 
"     `Know  also, my  friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum.  He  was "
plans  of  wise  wizards  like  Gandalf  and  of  good  friends  like  Elrond  go  astray 
"praise.  He  came  seldom to the Mark, for he  was ever  in the wars on  the "
"Gustavo Brigdale,4017954277487329,14-01-1975
"
     So it was that near the end of a wild and wet  evening in the last days 
"before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the  songs come  true "
"####-grey hood, a brown hood, and a white hood were hanging on the pegs, and off they "
their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.' 
     There was neither star  nor moon when  the Riders came  to the breach in  
"Rubin Mocquer,4222305855799,17-12-1978
"
"     'There isn't  no pipe-weed  now,' said  Hob; 'at  least  only  for  the "
"count.  There time  flowed swiftly by  us,  as  for the Elves. The  old moon "
"####-Aragorn dismounted, and standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice: "
"the  woods of  Laurelindurenan ! That  is what the Elves used to call it, but "
"     clad in mail, never clinking. "
"caps  were  of  iron  and  they  were  shod  with  iron,  and  their  faces  were  grim. "
     Over the flowing sea? 
"Rozelle Darkott,4017957607382086,10-07-1991
"
     `What those  marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The 
"guide you. Not  in a  thousand years should  I  forget  the ways of  this palace."" Then "
"     'And wher e  will other  men look for help, if  Gondor  falls?' answered "
and the Dark Power was bending all its will to  gather them there.  The Ring 
"     `I think -- No, I will not say,' answered Frodo. `Whatever it was,  its "
"     Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor  "
"must hurry. I've met nothing alive, and  I've seen nothing but I'm not easy. "
"a throng that their shadow followed them  darkly over the  ground below, one "
"wind,  it  came  from  the  North,  like  a  vast  cloud  of  birds,  so  dense  that  no  light "
"Pearle Clayden,4041375677560038,06-02-1981
"
     The Company  of the Ring stood silent beside the  tomb of  Balin. Frodo 
only  a dim  twilight came  through the  windows; the air  was  heavy as with 
looked into the opening sky. 
Fire and Water 
"forest -trees  in  their  prime; but  there were no young Ents, no  saplings. "
"     ""Talking,' said Bilbo. `There was a deal  of  talk, and everyone had an "
spite of Shelob they were forced  to use it  often as the swiftest  way from 
"""But—""said Bilbo again. "
foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark was the danger 
 
"that they had left among the walking-sticks Dwalin and Balin said: ""Excuse me, I "
"     The travellers stayed in Bree all the next day, and Mr. Butterbur could "
     But dark is the path appointed for thee: 
"     'Now!' he said to himself, slapping his  forehead. 'Now what  does that "
"     'I do,' said Frodo. `I will go with Sam.' "
"over  the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the "
"seen an Elf in the  woods, and still hoped to  see more one  day. Of all the "
""
"shields: their bosses were  overlaid with gold and set with gems,  green and "
"Bradley Kaminski,4017954970539,03-06-1975
"
"more so, if  he's false. Do you remember he never would say if this pass was "
"looking  for  Baggins, and if they mean well, then  I'm a hobbit. It was  on "
"Longbottom and by Sarn Ford, I hear; and some more lurking in the Woody "
hopeful.' 
"####-     Gollum withdrew himself, and a green glint  flickered under  his  heavy "
     He ran back to the lower  storey and tried the door. It would not move. 
""
Frodo 
him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire flew from his feet; night rushed 
"in  file, and evening came on and a  deep blue  dusk; and still fear pursued "
"than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of  your hearts, and you  "
"'Gollum, gollum,' he whimpered with his face  to the  ground. 'Don't look at "
"save  the  vapour  and  the  water,  and  every  now  and  again  a  black  and  ominous "
"indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot  sleep "
"in the evening. There the white Snowbourn, joined by the lesser stream, went "
"""What have I, I wonder?"" he said to himself, as he panted and stumbled along. "
"Fleming Keesman,4041591103449063,07-03-1975
"
"####-those  of  the  goblin-cities:  they  were  smaller,  less  deep  underground,  and  filled "
"it be a sign that though  the world is now dark better days are at hand, and "
"Walliw Manuaud,4041373690189,10-12-1992
"
"and not only  for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it,  "
"But  Thorin  was  not moved.  ""Winter  and  snow  will  bite both men and elves,"" "
     'Then all this strange land belongs to him?' 
"also that though they  walked alone, there  were many men close at hand: not "
on  its chain about his neck grow  more burdensome.  He was now beginning to 
"Cristi Diviney,4041596058297,06-12-2000
"
could tell. 
"####-Next day they started before dawn, though their night had been short. As soon "
"flapping; the beds  were tossed about,  and the bolsters  slashed and  flung "
"'and since he  has done you  great injury, it  would  be fitting if you were "
 
     All was ominously quiet.  The light was no more than that of dusk  at a  
"####-it; though lesser  men with spades might have served you  better.  Still, we "
"the  wild  lands  on  this  side  of  the  mountains,  and  especially  of  the  dark  and "
####-Lazy Lob and crazy Cob 
Immediately after  their cold  and  comfortless  breakfast Strider  went off 
"and then it goes down,  down, again  --  to Gorgoroth.'  His voice sank  to a  "
"clasped  a belt, at which there hung a  short  sheath holding a broad-bladed "
from the out-walls of Minas Tirith  that encircled the townlands. Scouts had 
"the Shire, and for his Reckoning of  Years m which he discussed the relation "
"hawthorn-berries. He nibbled a bit of sorrel, and he drank from a small mountain-"
"####-us,""  they said; and so  they made off,  leading  their ponies (with all due and proper "
"Brianna Partington,4017958788440,08-11-1979
"
"as fast as they could, over patches of grass, and through  thick  drifts  of "
"notice already that Mr. Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to believe, also "
and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?' 
silences they saw in their minds pools and  waters wider  than any  they had 
you.  Did not Ganda lf tell  you that  the rings give power  according to the 
"silent, moving restlessly about; but now they  were sitting in a circle, and "
to grief perhaps.  Yet often I  doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. 
####-about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?' 
"     Something was now  climbing slowly, and  its breath  came  like a   soft "
     'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?' asked Gandalf.  
""
"     `But within those bounds nothing seems to  dismay him,'  said  Erestor. "
Thorin. 
"Bobbie Tiffany,4041376962569,07-09-1993
"
south.  Away over  the  flats  they could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury 
"them, not even  Elves nowadays. Still,  I  take more kindly to Elves than  to "
"     'I don't know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had  forgotten all "
did Bilbo know?' 
####-shall return soon.' 
"Horton Freyn,4293345822040,23-02-2001
"
"####-places much  grass  at either side, in which  the  hobbits walked when  they "
""
leave out the eyes!  ' 
"was  growing, and the tall columns and carven  figures beside the  way  went "
"sight.  It was wide  and well-paved, and along its eastern  edge ran a broad "
began to draw nearer. 
kept secret the ring that he bad found. 
other than burning and thieving:  not  above a mile from the end of Bywater. 
"Davin Lornsen,4492336288159,11-02-2001
"
"regions. In one  Sam had found some water left, stale, muddied by  the orcs,  "
"it is no longer my  task to set things to rights, nor to help folk to do so. "
here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any  nearer to our  purpose. What 
letter. 
over  to Orcs  as  gladly  as kiss  his hand.  But  I was forgetting --  his 
the sun  gleamed  up above;  but all the lower city  was still  wrapped in a  
"     There Beren came from mountains cold, "
"cover your face with a mask,  give you longer arms, and make you bow-legged. "
     'Save your breath!' laughed Merry. 'I've a better.' Then lifting up his 
than bark.  It takes a  very  heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They 
they left  Sam  and Pippin with the pony and  their  packs and  luggage. The 
     'Behold Isildur's Bane!' said Elrond. 
that lay beside the great road in East Anurien. 
 
"Sylvan Clewlow,4041597634310336,27-09-1994
"
evergreen woods of Ithilien. 
"     Suddenly the silence was broken,  and  they  heard below them cries and  "
"face,  and  presently the figure turned aside round  a bend in the road  and "
poetry  and  visiting  the  elves;  and  though  many  shook  their  heads  and  touched 
down. At last the voice of Faramir ordered them to be uncovered. 
"front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path that  went through "
"air.  Far away, now almost  due  south, the mountain-walls of Mordor loomed, "
grass by the Huorns could be  plainly  seen. The Dunlendings and many men of 
"     Long was the way that fate them bore, "
still before him. Neither moved. 
"Bilbo  thought  he  knew what  the wizard meant.  ""What  shall we  do,""  he  cried, "
again this  evening.  Hollin is no  longer wholesome  for  us: it  is  being 
"to  the  gloaming  and  the  dusk. Still  elves  they were  and  remain,  and  that  is Good "
"foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the "
"that was it, once upon a time. Now it is the Dreamflower. Ah well! But it is "
"he was of high blood,  and  his folk also, tall  men and proud with sea -grey "
"As  the count grew he slowed down, and he began  to get shaky and weepy; for "
"earth  and sky had suddenly waked up, and was  considering you with the same "
"     'Then call  the  heralds,  Jomer,' said  Thjoden. 'Let  the  Riders  be "
strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it. 
"of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as  a rising star  struggling "
"as quickly  as possible. I am not  going out of the way, back to the road we "
     'What  do you mean?' said Frodo. 'Surely the Ring was his  precious and 
know of this new shape  in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought 
"     'So  it ends  as I  guessed  it  would,' his  thought said,  even as it "
     'Then why  did he  stay  to  listen?  Did  you go into  Orthanc?' asked 
"the  ancient tongue of the Elves  beyond the Sea, and he  did not understand  "
"towards  them  it  seemed  that  the  chill  of  the  air  was  warmed,  and  they  caught "
     The wolf snarled and  sprang towards  them  with a great leap.  At that 
"the  tunnel;  but  neither  up  nor  down  it  could  he  find  anything:  nothing  at  all,  no "
     `That  was the  undoing of Saruman's plot.  For Radagast knew no reason 
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a  busy man. I'll do what I can to  set  
"just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark. "
     and where he dwelleth none can say; 
scrambled down as  fast as his  stiff  legs would  take him and managed  just  in  time 
"tell.  And you, too,  would perhaps wish to learn  something of  us and  the "
""
"bank?"" asked the hobbit. "
"ways of paying for tricks that you won't like, though they won't spoil  your "
to  look  at  the  time  and  to  go  and  put  his  kettle  on-and  found he was not home at 
conversation was at an end. 
"answered by another  cry, fainter and further off, but no less  chilling  to "
"Tommy Cossell,4041597299601,24-10-1980
"
"the river, which was shallow and clear and stony at the ford. When they had dried "
"that his father was not king. ""How many hundreds of years needs it to make a "
"men  abreast.  Swiftly  along  this  they  ran,  and  round  a  wide-sweeping  turn-and "
"voices the  King passed through  the flower -laden streets,  and  came to the "
was 
in  me:  these  howls  freeze my  blood.  I  don't ever  remember feeling so 
through the Argonath  my  choices have  gone amiss.' He  fell  silent gazing 
"Aldric Reason,4017959161179551,13-03-1984
"
""
     and the brook that leaps from hill to plain; 
"Down they go, down they bump! "
"""The dragon is still alive and in the halls under the Mountain then-or I imagine "
"fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour made them. More were "
"his own small  vo ice  echoing in black tunnels,  calling  Frodo, Frodo!  But "
kept no watch. We thought we'd left all trouble behind us.' 
"came this way before."" "
     There was  a silence.  At length Celeborn spoke again. `I did  not know 
"please, and in my own time. I happen to be going to Bag End on business, but "
"     'I have been so  taken up with the thoughts of leaving  Bag End, and of "
"Horten Allsepp,4041375911526,27-10-1979
"
"a test,  and she thought to read our thoughts  for her own good purpose; but "
"promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never come again, never speak, no "
sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond. 
"and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses,  to control it. "
"""It  was  tied  after  all,""  said  he,  looking  at  the  snapped  painter  that  was  still "
"again! But it'll come back, when I have time to  think. I'm run off my feet; "
"Derril Biasi,4139690823898089,11-05-1977
"
"     'Then all the A more reason  to have left sooner,' said Saruman; 'for I "
"power and authority. 'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey,  whom you betrayed. "
"garden, if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may  remember  Galadriel, "
"Griff Dunckley,4041596003335,01-04-1993
"
"storm  coming  up,  and  away  to  the  south-east there  was  a  shimmer of "
"     He heard no answer.  He  found he was  shaking all over, but he gathered  "
they  are crippled.  But  the  Ringwraiths  themselves cannot  be  so easily 
of a great wind  the  last host of Rohan rode thundering into  the West. Far 
"Wittie Bodemeaid,4114017631792,15-09-1977
"
them; but he  made no secret that he owed  his  recent knowledge  largely to 
"enemy  had they seen, no cry or  call had been heard, no shaft had sped from "
"my doubts. He looks more like a grocer-than a burglar!"" "
"followed  him.  Slowly  they  moved off, and were soon  toiling heavily.  In "
 
mouthful of water; and then  he had seemed to curl up for a sleep:  They had 
"     'I thought you said there  was  a  tunnel,' said  Sam.  `Isn't  there a  "
"     'The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety, for  "
"gone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place. "
"Rolland Gilfether,4035223132996,07-10-1983
"
and (if Sam had known it) to himself. Also in  the  autumn there appeared  a  
"Fallohides. The Harfoots were  browner  of skin, smaller,  and  shorter, and "
"darkness: the fourth way, the road they were to take. "
"it  with  black paddles. In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind "
could not be seen for a clutter of large huts. 
wanting?' 
walked  towards them  without speaking.  His  face  looked grim and sad.  He 
"rocks  at  its  southern  corner.  About  midday,  creeping  behind  a  great  stone  that "
"Almira Gookey,4017954452587,06-11-1986
"
"not chosen someone with more sense. ""He has been more trouble than use so far,"" "
"Brigham Brawson,4041372104174,11-03-1986
"
"the  darkness,  Smjagol? Were you  not rather  permitted  to  depart upon an "
"     And metal wrought like fishes' mail, "
all to rights. Good  luck to you! And the  oftener you  come back the better  
"Gabriello Mion,4141097913485,12-07-1982
"
"hidden from me. I know the answer to many riddles. Alas, alas for Boromir!' "
"any  challenge. There was a light gleaming from  a high window in the tower, "
"forget that you are supposed to be  escaping in secret, and are still on the "
you'll get  as much lash as your skins will  carry when you come in late  to 
"dragon-slayer,  and  as  the  heir  of  Girion.  From  that  portion  Bard  will  himself "
whole.' 
He  also had  a  bow at his back and carried  a short broad-headed spear. As 
stood beside her. 'The weed is  better than I thought. It reminds me  of the 
"the  stream,  dabbling  their  sore feet and legs, and peering round at  the "
"Andrew Gensavage,4041373198098216,15-12-1980
"
the North-borders.' 
there fell a living voice. 
"strong,  from  Tuckborough and  the Green Hills with  Pippin at their  head. "
     It  was some distance from  the  Brandywine  to  Frodo's new  house  at 
"head  had lain.  Then coming to the  doorway he drew aside the covering, and "
"Dark Tower, or of the White.' "
"####-below,  smacking  into  the water,  jostling against  the walls of  the  tunnel, knocking "
Ring: why  cannot I see all the others  and know the thoughts  of those that 
"Dori  and  Bilbo  were,  and  then  went  sniffling  about  till  they  had  smelt  out  every "
is most  likely to slip. I don't want to come down atop of you a nd knock you  
"Doreen Whitsun,4410426518756,02-09-1997
"
""
the days of Gondor that you have known; for good or evil they are ended. Ill 
"four; but any of you are welcome at any time!"" "
their  guards steered them  from  behind with  hands  laid  firmly on  their 
"Ghvn-buri-ghvn and to his folk, to be their own  for ever; and hereafter let "
"Buck-land live in the Old Forest; but they're a queer breed, seemingly. They  "
"     go down deep again along the forest-water, "
     It  was  dark and  damp. At the far  end it  was  closed  by  a gate of 
"just  decided  to  roast  the dwarves now and eat  them  later-that was Bert's idea, and "
"     Going  on was  not altogether easy.  They had packs  to carry,  and the "
when  they became  aware of  the dim blowing of horns  in  the wood  and  the  sound 
Gandalf laughed. 'But what would they say in song? Those that looked up from 
"crawling, almost like a dog. To the road again, Worm!' said Saruman.  'These "
""
"of  your orc-friends,  I warrant. You nasty treacherous creature. It's round "
"deep, where I can't lay my hands on it, in a manner of speaking.' "
I  look into  his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes 
"today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across "
"opening behind the bushes. and back, down the stairs  and passages, into the "
"clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!' "
glad to find a place where  they could  rest  with  at least more feeling of 
"ever, it seemed, from the end of their quest. None of them had much spirit left. "
"and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.' "
"persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That power he certainly still "
water -lilies.  
     'Who says there's bad news?' shouted the soldier. 
bought.' 
Now  the  very  last  barrel  was  being  rolled  to  the  doors!  In  despair  and  not 
     Pippin's  face brightened visibly at the  mere  mention  of  return  to 
"Purcell Madden,4414988551973,08-01-1976
"
"     'You lie,' said Wormtongue. "
"     `Then  be comforted,'  said  Elrond.  `For  there are  other powers and "
"     Then Aragorn stooped and looked in her face, and it was indeed white as "
funny customer asked me?' 
He drew Sting and ran towards the  open gate. But  just as he was  about  to 
"     He took  a few  steps away  and  looked  back  inquiringly,  like a dog "
 
"hammer that the king of Gondolin once wore. Keep them well!"" "
"     With shining hand by her were sawn, "
'Wormtongue. You told Thjoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?' 
"master of healing, but the weapons of  our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the "
"swiftest way, and I will take the Paths of the Dead.' "
tonight.' 
the Orcs. From the yells  and screeches that came from the knoll the hobbits 
out from the eastern  windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night. 
""
"Margret Fourmy,4041598892176906,08-01-1995
"
sometimes when  you  are  off  on  dangerous  adventures  over  the Edge  of  the Wild; 
     He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the  long grasses.  
"     `But in that time also he made this scroll,' said Gandalf;  `and that is "
wolves about.' 
"and it  seemed  no  more, so I  tried  no arrow.  It was too  dark for  sure "
"caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.' "
"     Yes,  hm,  well   no:  I  do  not  really  know   now,  said  Treebeard "
"Koo Penner,4041590671673,24-10-1976
"
did things then that  filled me with a  fear that no words  of Saruman could 
"the Shadow. and their race, as  that of their masters, is descended from the "
"Jerome Venard,4041370199777749,08-09-1980
"
"towards the lower course of the stream, was strange to him. At last he came to the "
####- 
course passed in a cutting along the face of the  cone  and came to the dark 
"     Aragorn smiled. 'Keen are the eyes of the Elves,' he said. "
"that's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if  you  can. "
""
"clear sweet bell ringing in  a tower of  the citadel. Three strokes it rang, "
"valleys of the  Emyn Muil, and I did not know  of their captivity, until the "
"little and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden by  "
"had lost his pack at Parth  Galen, and all he had was a few useful things he "
     They  started  off again. They  had not gone  far  when  Frodo  paused.  
with  their  feet in the hurrying river. In the mid-morning the  clouds drew 
"on the strangers' side, and they've gone off  with them; and it's my  belief "
"     'I can see nothing  away north or west but  grass dwindling into mist,' "
"fir-wood, and drew  water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was "
floor of a tunnel. He put it in h is pocket. It seemed then like mere luck. 
     Treebeard  now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders  and strode on 
song or music. At last they turned away and faded silently into the dusk. 
verily from the land of Gondor I  am come. And  it would  be well for all to 
"face, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he  said. 'The men of "
"himself  came  to  Sam's  mind,  drawn  from  the  Gaffer's  large  paternal "
"Madeline Nunes Nabarro,4017956399125,02-02-1981
"
"to get hold of the keys. This is a mad idea!"" "
""
"     Saruman laughed. 'You do what Sharkey says,  always, don't  you,  Worm?  "
"countrymen give us  scornful names. ""Strider""  I am to one fat man who lives "
####-     `Good!'  said  Gandalf.  `It is  mending  fast. You will soon be  sound 
for ever silent between the mountain and the tower. 
"it, for I'll be  always in the dark now. It's too good  for me, and the Lady "
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!' 
and taste it again!' 
"     'Maybe you could, if I let you,' said Pippin with a laugh. 'And maybe I "
"Corrie Moodycliffe,4017958033174774,12-12-1995
"
"####-     'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a  crumb, I "
"and  the land within was made into a garden  filled with orchards and trees,  "
"Jackie Goymer,4017955287319063,25-05-1992
"
"deadly fear. ""Who told  you, and who sent you? "" I asked. "
"     'Then  you certainly will not  be chosen, Peregrin Took!' said Gandalf, "
mean?' 
"Cirillo Makinson,4017547323728306,09-08-1988
"
mud. 
Then the wind died  away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged 
the noise of the falls could be heard like a distant roar.  
"can! But what is it they've got, pr ecious? Is it crunchable? Is it tasty? ' "
of his brother.' 
 
"branch, water and  stone: they have the hue and beauty  of all  these things "
"     To this all agreed, but their retreat  was  now difficult. It might well "
"if you were a Nazgyl, I wouldn't.' "
"childhood was  being  shabbily  destroyed before  I was  ten, in  days  when "
"     'The  Dead are following,'  said Legolas. 'I  see shapes  of Men and of "
caught by feel. 
bring you aid.' 
"come  to the Gap of Rohan, where men  are friendly to  my people, taking the "
""
"not  sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night-hours a  cold "
"all the  Brandy  bucks.  Of course he's  a terror to trespassers, and  keeps "
"nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that  tell how the  Onodrim,  "
were revealed. 
"rim of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They were "
"     `It does look  sort of silver in the dark,' said Sam. `Never noticed it "
"domination of the Dark Power, did  thus,  slaying  themselves  in pride  and "
while  out  from the Dark Tower  there crept the veils of Shadow that Sauron 
"Gabriela Harbard,4041591796222,18-01-1980
"
"unwilling his eye was drawn.  It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the "
"Jomer; and we knew naught of her riding  until this hour, and greatly we rue "
"     `Yet such as we are we will try it,' said Aragorn. "
"knuckles whitened as  they gripped  on their  weapons. Wormtongue hesitated, "
"Jacinthe Nisco,4041377825443,08-02-1989
"
spouthole. Great  white steams hissed up. Smoke rose in billows.  There were 
beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?' 
from Rivendell. 
"     'I  am afraid that's only too  true, Sam,' said Frodo. `Yet I hope very "
     'But  what about this Frodo that lives with  him?'  asked Old Noakes of 
     The farmer laughed.  'They  won't harm you - not unless I  tell 'em to. 
the 
and Pippin rode on to Buckland; and already they  were singing again as they 
"kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast. "
end.' 
"little  while, and f will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do not "
all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle. A little stream 
"Hours-days, weeks rather. Sam left the tunnel -side and shrank towards Frodo, "
""
"had  recovered, and he said nothing about  himself. In the meanwhile Bag End "
stronger  and  bolder  with new food  and  new air. He  found  his way  into 
Indeed Bilbo was  so  pleased with  their  praise  that he just chuckled inside and 
"lot, I  can tell you, before he was finally  caught. After which, I may say, "
""
"Kristel Ephgrave,4017952798411,10-11-1979
"
"Sophronia Netti,4017959969429,02-02-2001
"
"yestermorn, ere the Sun had climbed over the mountain-tops. He is gone.' "
them right.  There will  be such a deal of singing  that  the  ideas wi ll be 
""
"Dewey Sergant,4041593964427402,15-01-1977
"
"     The hobbits  led their  ponies up, winding  round and  round until they "
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile. 
"treasure. And even now, when I will allow we have a good bit laid by and are not "
     After  their morning meal the Company said farewell to  the lawn by the 
"grabbed Bilbo by the neck, before he could duck behind the tree. "
"     And they saw that  in  the midst  of the eyot  a mound was piled, ringed "
"inadequate  pat of   butter which was set out for him,  beside  a cup of thin "
"     'But how  shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by "
"Matthew Mattityahou,4017953977816,26-04-1978
"
to begin.' 
came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul.' 
     When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.  
"Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.' "
"     And she answered  as one  that likes not what is said: ""Then, lord, you  "
that  door  behind  leads  into  a  rock-hewn  chamber  that  was  made  here  as  a 
"company. Smjagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.' "
"     Sam, waking  suddenly  by some instinct of watchfulness,  saw first his "
"a little, for they had expected more welcome. "
"""That  will  save  him  some  of  the  trouble  he  is  in  for,""  said  Mr.  Baggins  to "
All  along it for many leagues  east of the Bridge there are  trees growing. 
a single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees; but his 
"Noland Derrington,4041591073184864,05-01-1993
"
"     `Then the rope must have broken  -- frayed on the rock -edge, I expect,' "
"     'Yes,  Master. Dangerous places. This is the road from the Tower of the "
     And over Middle -earth he passed 
"forward,  sometimes discovering  that they  had wandered in a circle back to "
hats now?' 
"friendly,  and  indeed pitifully anxious  to  please.  He would cackle  with "
glow. Quickly he stepped back. 
""
the might of Mordor. 
"     But Jowyn said:  'Yet  now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. "
####-eastward and  gazed at the tall island.  Its  si des  sprang sheer out of the 
be  in danger if you were  not  with them! The pursuit  would follow you and 
rope-ladder rolled up. 
As  soon as  they  left his high hedges at  the east of his  fenced lands they turned 
"     'Good  master,  wise master,  nice master!'  cried  Gollum in  delight, "
"air's moving, change is coming. Smjagol wonders; he's not happy.' "
deep and  dark.  On  the  further  shores the  woodlands  still  marched  on 
"to stay  behind and deal with inquisitive folk,  and  to keep up as long  as "
"Now  the  dwarves  took  down  mail  and  weapons  from  the  walls,  and  armed "
"     'I will, when I learn what you are fit for,' said Denethor. 'But that I "
"     'Master  Meriadoc,'  said  Aragorn,  'if  you  think that  I have passed "
""
"should be lying beside the  king, and  in no  less  honour? Where  have they "
"     'Do not be afraid,'  said Aragorn. 'I came in  time, and  I have called "
"Tymon Repper,4041371990672,12-07-1999
"
"whom she  loved as a father, and watch him falling  into a  mean dishonoured "
"looking to the West; but out of the West came a cold wind, and it bent away,  "
Chapter 11. A Knife in the Dark 
"and high summer is not yet in; and though all things may seem changed, as if "
"Natalie Plumtree,4041596784330,28-01-1990
"
"     `Yes,' said Frodo.  'At least, you must  either  accept this promise or "
     They wavered. Doubt  came into them as the light approached. One by one 
"     After a while the  king led  his  men away somewhat  eastward, to  come "
"'Talking won't mend nothing,' he muttered to himself,  as he gathered up all "
"     'All  right,' said  Sam, laughing with the rest. 'But  what about these "
cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once into a long sleep. 
"stepped towards the  fallen  body, there was a  new noise.  Great crying and "
"direction of the pine-woods on the east side of the Misty Mountains, where we had "
waters  of  the  lake  to  turn  yellow  right  away.  The  captain  of  the  guard  came 
Worm is not really nice. You had better leave him to me.' 
"     In a fury he  hewed at  them with his  sword,  but  the thread  that he "
"the bank  of the Entwash, he came upon  footprints:  hobbit-prints, but  too "
"     I will leave, I will leave the wo ods that bore me; "
"sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck  most  by the leanness  of his face "
and lay on the top spread out to keep the balance as best he could. The breeze was 
evil 
the East. 'We  won't! ' he  cried. 'Not for  you.' Then he collapsed   again. 
to have left the mournful  Fords. As they  went  the  howling of the  wolves 
"     'There  is  no  need, I think,'  said  Strider,  coining  out.  'It  is "
"     Sam passed his hand over  his eyes, brushing  away the  tears. 'Steady, "
"""Why on earth didn't you mention it before?"" they cried. "
"began to murmur slowly: first  one joined and then  another, until they were "
"lots of  tales in the evening, sitting by the  banks  of the Great River, in "
"Freemon Hilldrup,4041590049869111,31-07-1983
"
     He wondered  very much what kind of folk they were. He wished  now that 
then they slowly faded away. Far off  a  horn  blew on  the ramparts of  the 
Elven-tongue. 
"the danger that he  sees,  and  he  has fled  back to Isengard to double and "
"swift, and it  led  not to Mordor but  away. Along  the  skirts  of the Dead "
"to the view of Osgiliath.  Now  it appears that,  as the rock of Orthanc has "
"     'The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and  all the  defence swept away; but "
"Richmond Guillain,4041596515270,23-04-1977
"
well?' 
"not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort  us to know that others fought "
don't see  what it matters to me or you.  Let  them sail!  But I warrant you  
the speed that our horses could endure over the plains of Lebennin.' 
"above him and far off in the gloom. But certainly it was not a spark of dragon-fire, "
way to health. But I do not know--' 
tunnel seemed to have no end. All he knew was that it was still going down pretty 
"eastern borders  of  the Shire, and as he had lived there  in childhood  his "
"     Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather, "
adventure was at its lowest ebb. 
if you understand . 
"     There was not  as  yet  any  sign  of  a path,  and  the  trees  seemed "
"and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.' "
"     When the Prince Imrahil had parted  from Legolas and Gimli, at once  he "
"Leave the northern mountains steep, "
""
"Miguela Ceeley,4043912011860126,11-11-1975
"
"Tammy Hobson,4017951180801,17-08-1975
"
"Ambur Coad,4729721464451,13-06-1986
"
"     Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin, "
"that  was in  it, and  the silver swan of Dol Amroth was borne  in  the van, "
"accounted for.  He  knows that it is  the One.  And he has  at last heard, I "
     Frodo sighed and was  asleep almost before  the words were  spoken. Sam 
"can't see much by daylight, can they?  ' "
"Noami MacBain,4017959288452733,22-12-1997
"
"     'And a  brave deed,' said Aragorn. 'Sam was right,  I think.  Frodo did "
"     In this far land beneath the trees, "
"     'Maybe, maybe! Then you'll fly off with our prisoners, and get  all the "
""
"question  in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that?  "
"in reverence for the fallen king,  and in the crevices  of  his  stony  hair "
"they run!  There is Hasufel, and  there is my  friend Arod  beside  him! But "
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping  with his uncle in  the Shire; 
"     'They're mine!'  said Frodo. 'Given to me  by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among "
"from  a  distance,  and  after  wait-ing  for  some  time  for  Bilbo  to  come  back,  or  to "
"lifted up Gandalf and  sped away south, and  with  him  went Landroval,  and "
"former  wisdom, and which fondly  he imagined  were his own. came  but  "
"Gondor in  the seat of  Denethor,' said Hbma, stepping  swiftly  before  the "
"and he's loose in your bounds, too, and you've never spotted him. Very funny "
"have been  over  before I got back,  and I should have had even more trouble "
"     'He would come with  me, of  course, if I asked him. In fact he offered "
"can foresee the  end of it while this world lasts. If it is destroyed,  then "
"Yet golden treasure inside is hid, "
them could sleep at all; but as the sun far away was climbing down into slow 
"willows  down  the Entwash, gone  long ago,  alas!  They were  quite hollow, "
may be from tomorrow's morn  ere you hear the cry of the Sons of Eorl coming 
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare 
####- 
"Carine Keeney,4829346985124740,27-07-1994
"
a drifted snow: small flowers  sprang there like  countless stars  amid  the 
"     'I have  returned from the  Northern  Fences,'  said the Elf, `and I am "
"     Pippin looked out of  the western window, down into a pool of mist. The  "
"     'I don't  know what it is,'  he  said, 'but  I suddenly felt afraid.  I "
"back, caught a queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo.  "
     'Who is he?' asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before.' 
posts made  of  single  tree-trunks. It faced south and was still warm and filled with 
"present. It was his birthday present, and so on, and on. "
The King has come unto his hall! 
"look in it, if you will.' "
"mounted champion of Harad, had  fallen to the earth.  Only the charge of Dol "
"     'It is a gift that  I bring  you  from the Lady of Rivendell,' answered "
"Filippo Ebertz,4041594415197297,14-09-1976
"
"his heart. `The Shire! ' he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped, "
"     'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,' said Gandalf. `The power of "
"Fanechka Stenson,4041598330017,21-12-2001
"
fissh!  ' 
The river is flowing! 
reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept  - but 
"elves  sitting motionless  with their  arms about  their  knees, speaking in "
slowly rising to smother the regions of the sun. 
"that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken gate, and passed "
"was dark  and his  head  was  bowed.  They  dismounted, and  as  grooms took  "
"Marlow Timothy,4428026768928,16-09-1998
"
Chapter 5. The Steward and the King 
little people. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the fathers of  the 
those of wonder and delight. 
"They buried Thorin deep beneath the Mountain, and Bard laid the Arkenstone "
as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will not love the Orcs.' 
"     The craft  of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the Hobbits "
"     'No! not on it,' said Frodo, looking  down at him with stern pity. 'All "
"again over the  Great Sea  they had found the Bree-men still there, and they "
that he caught a  glint  of white: far away perchance the sun twinkled on  a  
"behind  a tree, and as Deal  gloated  over the  ring, Smjagol came softly up "
down. 
"     'They would.' grunted  Gorbag. `We'll  see. But anyway, if  it does  go "
to the remoter mountains of the North. 
"Flore Gorgler,4017959985639871,01-11-1989
"
"strip east of the Hedge. After that the  trees gave up the attack,  but they "
"trunk, were not wrinkled,  but covered  with a brown smooth skin.  The large "
"gate. The  hobbits  backed  away and  made no move  to open  it.  'Come  on, "
"would jump down a dragon's throat to  save you, if he did not trip over  his "
"Rennie Mateiko,4041370980228258,11-01-1975
"
"Then Thorin burst forth in anger: ""Our thanks, Róac Carc's son. You and your "
surprised at the  remarkable  way  in  which the  cuts  and  sores of  their 
""
at the top gave him a good supply. He cut out some turves at the foot of the 
"     'That settles it!'  said Frodo. 'Short cuts  make delays, but inns make "
seldom has he been challenged since he  returned to his  Tower. Though if  I 
"they were  not  keeping very careful watch,  for  it was  so  long  since  there had been "
"run  to  the  door.  It  was  not  four  after  all,  t  was  FIVE.  Another  dwarf  had  come "
"while, however,  the  river  took a more southerly course and  the Mountain  receded "
snarling noise. 
spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is 
"the tunnels of the goblins, and it seemed to offer even less hope of any ending. But "
"     Frodo  fidgeted,  wondering  what to  do.  Pippin  was  evidently  much "
lies the great bottommost cellar or dungeon-hall of the ancient dwarves right at the 
but the hobbits  began  to find it hard to keep up  with the swift  tireless 
Some would  flow blazing towards  Barad-dyr down  great channels; some 
     The others looked at  him.  The shadow of the fear of the  Black Riders 
"doorstep. 'No, no, no!'  he was  crying. 'No,  not me! I haven't got it!' It "
"the blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in "
his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up 
"for even as he struck his blow his arm was numbed, and now he could only use "
"really nasty, and have come back again to say it. It can wait.' "
"     A Elbereth Gilthoniel, "
""
"     'Yes,' muttered Pippin. 'It is the  sign of our fall, and the shadow of "
"half-knowing,  half-humorous look came with  a green flicker into his  eyes.  "
"     'The wind's changing,'  said Merry.  'It's  turned east again. It feels "
""
"     The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains. sent "
"legend I  begin a little to  understand the marvel  of the trees, I think. I "
"of  the  boat  which  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  go  back  and  look  for  the  hart, "
"great mound, covered with green turves of grass and  of white evermind.  And "
better.  Don't  tell  me  that  I  can  eat  a  dwarf-ridden  pony  and  not  know  it!  You'll 
"more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent. "
he's hungry.' 
####-household that still lived and had now mastered their horses. They looked in 
"the  nuncheon,  at noon or  after as  duties allow; and men  gather for  the "
them 
"sun, so  that his heart  was glad.  But  Smjagol had  been watching him from "
####-     the yellow gold and jewels wan. 
"which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even "
 
"from the seat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood. "
"grey  faces of inaccessible rock, crowned by  a great spire  of  stone. Many "
each  step he seemed to  diminish. He had not gone far  before he had shrunk 
"Twyla Shildrake,4041372330217,02-01-1987
"
of the study  to see how things were going  on and found her still about the 
past or far away; but his eyes gleamed like stars that shine the brighter as 
was 
"     'In this house, lady. He was sorely  hurt,  but is now set again on the "
"falling  like  a  log  into  sleep,  as  he  stepped  into  a  circle  of  light?  The  next  time  it "
"horrible to taste, and they shot no more squirrels. "
it? Come inside! We must have a talk.' 
"Brandea Fontell,4041378160378,21-06-1991
"
"he  was  so  nice  to  them,  for he  told  them himself. He had been over  the  river  and "
"most found this  hard to believe, harder than  any  other reason or unreason "
at  first  they  tried  to  use  these.  But  when  they  struck  the  stone  the  handles 
"     `Cram,' he said  under his breath,  as he broke off a crisp corner  and "
"     Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe, "
""
"draw it, and they'll get me  sooner or later. I wonder if any song will ever  "
"wouldn't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard  this one. What is it "
     Through the gate there now appeared  a broad  thick -set  hobbit  with a  
foot of  the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he washed clean the 
the Brockenbores by the hills of Scary. 
"first  at Frodo, and then at Tom standing  large  as life on  the barrow-top "
     'But surely we wer e hoping to find Gandalf there?' 
empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire. Neither goods nor folk 
"     He  cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he  had "
"overlapped, and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lamps.  "
"would think under this cloud. But time  does not stand still, though the Sun "
But now his mind was set on the last stage of his search. He came cautiously  
face fair and young and fearless and full  of  joy; his eyes were bright and 
featureless  flats  were in fact  all broken  and tumbled. Indeed the  whole 
speak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half-light behind 
walls on either side of the Gate the  ground was choked  with wreck and with 
"away, and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and vanished. "
"Rivalee Foxworthy,4041378937726,10-06-1987
"
music of the voices and the instruments. and they  gave no heed to  anything 
     'Going to Mordor!' cried Pippin. 'I hope it won't come to that!' 
"Zared Perfitt,4057116356185,28-06-1994
"
over him. 
"made the land, or  the  land's  made them, it's hard to say,  if you take my "
"""The Elvenking  is my  friend,  and  he  has  succoured  the  people  of  the Lake  in "
anything more terrible  than wind  or rain. And most  of  my songs are about 
the days he had  quite lost count. He  was in a  land  of darkness where the 
"be made  to  find  the  dwarves,  or  to  take  vengeance  on  the men  and  creatures  that "
"drawn at the uncovering of  his eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for  "
"And®ril gleamed,  and  the terror of  the sword  for a while  held  back the "
"Melinda McKee,4017959057075988,01-09-1994
"
"Hetty Basterfield,4041592641575864,11-01-1982
"
"adventures.  Anything  from  climbing  trees  to  visiting  Elves  -  or  sailing  in  ships, "
leaped into the sky. The red rim of the  sun rose over  the shoulders of the 
"determined  to set out at  once.  Since the coming of the winged  shadow, he "
end of his days.  
"stone. They spoke low and never called or sang, for danger brooded in every rock. "
     And arms like silver glimmering. 
"####-     Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam "
"turn his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides,  put out "
Then Legolas sang: 
####-     'No!  I could  not!' he said  to  himself.  'It is one thing to take my 
"body fell right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife. "
""
"and strong of wing, that you would send messengers to our kin in the mountains of "
that 
his  horse  was  not  suitable  for  the  mountain-paths.  For  goblins  eat  horses  and 
in  the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo  had already  
Merry's fear. He  opened his  eyes  and the  blackness was lifted from them. 
"followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can,  Pippin!' "
"""We may not understand him, but that old bird understands us, I am sure,"" said "
"Harrison Winson,4041595060690,13-09-1982
"
"can. Twelve isn't fifteen and they know it."" "
"     But other  potencies  there are in  Middle-earth, powers of night,  and "
"more  like  ten-so  that,  of  course,  he  quickly  noted  the  place  where  the  pony  had "
much  of  the way-and  he was  never  in  great danger again. Anyway by mid-winter 
"all unfriendly eyes when the  snow has covered us,  but that  will not  help "
knew now that the house  was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down 
"goes a  hundred leagues, until  you  can  see the Great Water that is  never  "
"Lucio Itzakson,4041378068316,15-02-2001
"
heard?' 
"nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt see what comes to him  who sets "
"clouds, there came a drumming rumble, a roar, a long echoing roll of ruinous "
they went as high as ever  they could  trust  the branches. You would have  laughed 
start  on.  But the water's going to be a  bad business. But come Mr. Frodo!  
"     There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and  falling, and "
done a good deal of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape 
"a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that  is, except those invited "
"claws on  it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!' said Frodo, as "
"     'No more than  you  can afford,' answered  Strider with a slow smile, as "
"under  the  river bank  teaching his grandmother,  teaching his grandmother  to suck-"
"the Mouth of Sauron.' But it is told that he was a renegade, who came of the "
mark of evil things that came in the Great  Darkness  that they cannot abide 
"     A sudden thought leaped into Pippin's mind, and he acted on it at once. "
"with him came a most decrepit old bird. He was getting blind, he could hardly fly, "
"goes for  most hobbits. Barley, he says to me,' continued Mr. Butterbur with "
"not  gone amiss, it would  have been  governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then "
"Menard Pache,4017954460844021,05-04-1989
"
the travellers brought and shared out they all made a  fair meal; and Pippin 
"Katlin Petrusch,4041597841690058,09-04-1985
"
"""Don't  be  precise,""  said  Dwalin,  ""and  don't  worry!  You will  have  to manage "
alive; they all had to be carried one by one and laid helpless on the shore. 
"     Treebeard ended  his song.  'That  is  how it goes,'  he  said.  'It is "
     They  all fell silent  for a while. Gimli re-filled his pipe. 'There is 
"Jessee Scates,4041598907254383,18-02-1997
"
"Legolas had  a bow and a  quiver,  and  at his belt a long  white knife. The "
as one. 
"the  horror, and I feared not the shadows of  Men, powerless and frail  as I "
"     His sword was long, his lance was keen, "
""
it was written in Frodo's firm flowing script.  It was divided into chapters 
"begged them. ""I fear that dragon in my marrow. I like this silence far less than the "
they  could  to the thorn-brakes that  grew thickly at this point along both 
"Hobbitry-in-arms,  but  as  muster  and moot  were only  held  in  times  of "
"Cristabel Fussell,4144495433658060,20-10-1987
"
"####-crossings. For some way i t took its course beside the river, bending with it "
"plans. No tidings of  the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to the horsemen  "
"ahead, looming up  like a black wall, they saw a belt of trees. As they drew "
"Celinda McMinn,4017951669856400,02-07-2001
"
home mostly and keep their doors barred. It all comes of those newcomers and 
"again it lifted its head slowly, turning  it  right back on  its long skinny "
     A wild light came  into Frodo's  eyes. 'Stand away! Don't touch me!' he 
     'These  we will take!' said Gandalf suddenly. He cast  aside  his cloak 
still hunting. 
"Happy Coldtart,4017952425494,10-02-2000
"
rightly regarding  themselves as  necessary parts of the Bree-folk.  Nowhere 
"fields by  night, dusk -silver  as  water under  the  stars. Each  cloak  was "
Amazement  and  confusion  fell  upon  them  all.  Even  as  Gandalf  had  been 
"####-     'If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his "
"passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they rode on, glad "
"Kim Leber,4296197287262306,30-10-2000
"
""
"     'But we  have not journeyed  far south yet,'  answered Aragorn. `It  is "
been. He found  laid ready  clean garments  of  green cloth that  fitted him 
"master, won't he come with Smjagol? ' "
####-So late in returning? 
long stair under the eyes of the tall  watchmen. Silent they stood now above  
"great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an elf-lord,  such as  Glorfindel, he "
with help on  which you cannot count again.  You may  find the Shadow of the 
"     So the  Company went on their long way, down the wide  hurrying waters,  "
"who, out  of the twisted  threads of story, could pick the  answer  to  your "
"waters pour into  a foaming  bowl, and then  swirl darkly about  a deep oval "
"come here safe together, if  we had left  the  Great River  on the second or  "
shorten their journey by cutting  across another great loop of the Road: east  
"Harriette Haggard,4160528312463,16-01-2001
"
"that was good and true. But I can say this:  you have an air too, sir,  that "
"Gardy Niven,4041596107664,11-07-1988
"
beyond  which lay the deep  dale of Udyn.  In that dale  behind the Morannon 
""
"     `Sit  now beside  my chair, Frodo of the Shire!  ' said Celeborn. `When "
"his purposes. I guess that  it was the Ithil-stone,  for he took Minas Ithil "
show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt). 
"     'Hobbiton's not their only place, is it?' said Pippin. "
"Mala Puckey,4017959756041539,09-04-1989
"
whistling. 
"though all things  must come  utterly to an  end  in  time, Gondor shall not "
####- 
"to claim the treasure  as my very own  in those days, and to be rid  of  the "
should be left in the West to remember the last King of the Mark. So he rode  
its stony face. The twigs of the trees at  its foot were stretched out stiff 
""
music)  they  were  still  in  tune.  The  dark  hall  was  filled  with  a  melody  that  had 
"     Merry  bowed and  went  away  unhappily,  and  stared  at the lines  of "
carry a sack of meal up  into the mountains-if any man would trust you  with  
"the  speech  of  such  birds,  it  is  very  quick  and  difficult.  Can  you  make  it  out "
back.' 
     They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 'I suppose you  
there  and  it  was  open  to  the sky;  stars were shining already in lakes 
The breathing  of  the  sleepers could be  plainly heard.  The swish  of the 
     'Hold still!  '  said one. `Or we'll stick  you  as full  of pins as  a  
out of the wide  shallow valley into which  they had  descended. Strider now  
"Wade Tales,4860616664937,24-03-1993
"
best news I have had since midsummer: it's worth a gold piece at  the least. 
"Here, I'll take that, my lad -- that's all. I wonder what it  is? It felt so "
"here,  for other things  than war. Your  father loves you, Faramir, and will "
not  get  up  at  the  brutes  and  he  had  nothing  to  shoot  with;  but  looking  about  he 
"it  year  after  year,  while  he  and  the  room  got  older  and  shabbier  "
"the days of Gondor are numbered, and the  walls of Minas Tirith are  doomed, "
"little underground creature,"" he thought: "
"old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger,  fatter  (and older)  than their "
"steadily  grew, until they found  themselves looking up quickly, or glancing "
"     'I hope so, I'm sure,' said Butterbur. 'Well, this  has been the nicest  "
"telling them,  as soon  as this feast is ended. In the meantime you  can try "
from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton. 
"     `Soon get more now,' he said, licking  his lips. `Good water  runs down "
"and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first  Hall should be on the Seventh "
after all the true events were forgotten. 
"his wretched heart between the pressure of the Eye, and the lust of the Ring "
noon!' 
"there  was a chair under  a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look  upon, "
"the distant mountains.  No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full on "
happen. There was a  flying  sound of hooves on  the path ahead. Out of  the gloom 
"     'Then our paths are sundered,' said  Jomer. 'He is  lost.  We must ride "
frightened of  them  too. Dwarves don't get on well with  them. Even decent enough 
"Jowyn, daughter of Jomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All "
"Levon Zambon,4041374183778259,09-10-1977
"
the hills at the  rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead. But the next 
cannot speak now. Gandalf the Grey was our leader.' 
"Granville Tyhurst,4041377073093,24-11-1989
"
"servants  of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace "
shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and 
"     When  Hbma  had  been  summoned and had  gone, Gandalf led Thjoden to "
"     That night they camped on  a stony shelf with a rock -wall  behind them, "
riders of the first jored heard him: 
"""I must  get  to  the  door,  I must  get  to  the  door!""  he  kept  on  saying  to  himself, "
      
"pinion,  flying  at a great height.  He covered his eyes and  bent  forward, "
and  already  some  spiders  were  in  the  trees  above  them  and  throwing  down  their 
"Tiphani Dobbins,4118298136306231,02-12-1985
"
had turned  aside his thought.  But  he  was  in haste. Already the hour had 
"west at once, as  Jomer counselled you: we must first destroy the  threat of "
in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak.' Suddenly 
     The change in  the wizard's voice  was  astounding. Suddenly it  became 
"their escort  left  them, making off  swiftly down  the  river and  the  shoreward paths, "
"home and he knows it well."" "
"we dealt with the ""Chief"".' "
"escape you. But I'm glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is "
"plight,  I  cannot guess.  He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc, to "
"it.  Its  explanation  lies in the history of the Ring, as it was set out in the chronicles "
"####-fought  among  themselves. In olden days  they had, of  course,  been  often "
daylight in the  sky. At the far side  of the glade there was a break in the 
"golden in colour: it had the scent of a honey made  of many flowers, and was "
grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the River or  
"this evening, anyway. But if you could spare me half an  hour before you  go "
you.' 
penalty. Now therefore I must pronounce your doom. 
"     The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm,  and ran to the western rim. "
"boatload.  Don't  start  grumbling  against  orders,  or  something  bad  will  happen  to "
'You  sleep long. I have  been many a hundred  strides already today. Now we 
"     'To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.' "
"river for the Lake-men to feast on for nothing!"" "
"slipped aside, twisted round, and drove his knife into his enemy 's throat. "
"     The Inn  of Bree  was still  there, however, and  the  innkeeper was an "
"     It was  not  long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point,  near "
"Mozelle Connaughton,4041594218299,08-03-1975
"
"Kennett Dudhill,4017956451447,19-03-1994
"
"thing at a hazard beyond all bu t a  fool's hope, risking our utter ruin,  if "
""
"edge  of  the  great  hall,  and  there  he  sat  down  and  worked  up  the  best  magic  he "
"their  folk,  and Elrond  and his sons; and the princes of Dol Amroth and of "
"     'I  shall have  to brush up my  toes,  if I am to  get level  with you. "
at the prisoner! 
     'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I  hardly feel that I  have 
     'Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?' said Frodo. 
the mountains  of  the South:  white-tipped  and  streaked  with black.  The 
"     Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging, digging lines of deep trenches "
"Jaclyn Behrens,4286276327251131,18-11-1986
"
The  dwarves  then  noticed  that  they  had  come  to  the  edge  of  a  ring where  elf-
garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up 
"     That lies there ever, long and bright. "
"since the night's beginning. Tomorrow, perhaps, you will be cured of weariness."" "
""
"North, licking the mountain-sides with flame, beating his great wings with a noise "
gazing out before him with a strange  light in his deep eyes. `There is  the 
"coming, but I was at work up the valley; there is much still to be done. But "
"And long listening's hungry work, morning, noon,  and evening!' With that he "
"Mikael Gierck,4041597392106561,08-09-1997
"
"Wilderland. They were the most normal  and representative variety of Hobbit, "
"####-other may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our dwellings, down "
"and my folk'll keep watch  tonight; but you had best get some  sleep, if you  "
"grey but in  white, in  a white  that shone faintly in the dusk; and  in its "
"You would have changed from hunters to prey, if ever you had overtaken them. "
so.' 
went off in coloured sparks and smoke. A specially large one hit the chief wolf on 
"Thornie Pawlyn,4052517346802,11-12-1989
"
over the long leagues his mind sought for them in hope and pity. 
tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.' 
     Sam  tried to  guess the distances and to decide what way they ought to 
"voices all round them,  and suddenly  they were aware that Farmer Cotton was "
"Fara Armiger,4041593605044558,07-08-1987
"
"     'Well, master,  we're in  a fix and  no mistake,'  sa id Sam  Gamgee. He "
"father -in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often  did after his marriage (him "
"and he  is  now the Steward; for Denethor has departed, and his house is  in "
tidings make  clear.  So great a power as the  Dark Lord seems  now to wield 
"stone seat, and then sat  himself before  the  king upon  the topmost stair. "
####- 
him. 
"in a  gesture of  rejection  and  denial. Edrendil, the Evening  Star,  most  "
"Imladris,  Gandalf  the Grey,'  said  Elrond, as  the shadow passed  and the "
"""A bit further,"" said Gandalf. "
"sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness in "
"Thrain's  son  Oakenshield,  calling  himself  the  King  under  the  Mountain,  and  we "
"his fame began to gr ow. He was  chosen to be head of the White Council, they "
By  the  time  the wizard had  finished his  tale  and had  told of  the  eagles'  rescue 
"river  runs  right out of  it  through  the great  cliff  at  the South of  the Mountain,  and "
Frodo's shoulders. `Now you're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.' 
"foremother,  and  it  is  said  that  her line shall  never fail.  Elrond of "
"that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.' "
while the  others remained  by the  boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by 
tongue: The way is shut. 
"Karlan Wigin,4017959905688263,15-09-2001
"
that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is  nothing that Sauron 
"hobbit  in  real  stealth,  and  the made  a  deal  of  puffing  and  shuffling which  echoes "
"passage that seemed still to go  up before  them,  though at a gentler slope "
"patting Frodo's knees. `Good master! Then rest  now, nice hobbits, under the "
"Hailee Drinkhill,4041598812696983,18-08-1991
"
"Sula Batey,4017958594616,18-03-1989
"
"     The  wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and  arrows whined; but the  sun "
"cliff,  and  keeping  as  far  from the  dark water as  they might.  A  mile "
     'Orders to  you.  I'm in command  of this pass.  So speak civil. What's 
"and wash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn. Frodo! ' "
"Andrea Minett,4017958333825,29-08-2001
"
version of those  parts of The  Tale of Aragorn  and Arwen which lie outside 
"Whitby Keener,4409363942244873,20-07-2000
"
"     Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their grey "
along the shore. 
"Westleigh Pitson,4017953290148868,14-10-2001
"
little vermin!' he hissed. 'Untie your legs? I'll untie every string in your 
Chapter 10. The Voice of Saruman 
"""Not as stiff as my legs,"" said Bilbo. ""I am tired of stairs and stone passages. I "
""
####-and come to him.' 
there were already to be found in the Shire several libraries tha t contained 
"of a cord, and Frodo and Sam stumbled  forward. Then they  ran.  Through the "
"in burrows  of the  most  primitive  kind,  mere holes indeed, with only one "
fade  and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another  chamber and another  
"Now  they sat  side by side again  in the embrasure  looking eastward, where "
"line,'  said  Aragorn;  'but  if we strayed, or they turned aside, then when "
"heart,  and  he  knew  his  guesses  were  not  far  out,  though  he  suspected  that  the "
"Damian Franckton,4017955404526251,26-04-1977
"
"     'He  did,' said  Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under  the "
"speaking; yet now the voice seemed strange, recalling  some other voice  that "
"Adelbert Silverson,4570278675194413,14-12-1991
"
"done smart and secret, and the prisoners are not able to defend themselves. "
"hobbits had no welcome for that light; unfriendly  it seemed, revealing them "
barrels  close  ashore  at  one  point  and  there  for  a  while  they  stuck  against  some 
"especially the  varieties  now  known  as Longbottom  Leaf,  Old  Toby,  and "
"boughs, stooping to the ground, were overridden  by a clambering maze of old "
"     Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather, "
"Virgie Staden,4898823545432,22-12-1978
"
gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists were lifting  
"just  here though!'  He stole away, and sat down on a green hillock not  far "
aloud: 'The sword of Elendil! The  sword  of Elendil comes  to Minas Tirith!  
"""They  live many  a  year,  and  their memories  are  long,  and  they  hand  on  their "
fallen mate. 
"needed one; partly as a way out into the lands beyond, where they still come in the "
""
"wide  lands  to  the black wall of Mirkwood,  and  to  the distances beyond,  in which "
     Fail - even as he said the word his voice faded  into  silence. The air 
"Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything  to anybody; "
"Faramir. 'No longer do I desire to be a queen,' she said. "
"Charil McGeachie,4017959670837,03-10-1999
"
slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most inconveniently it cut across the 
"be trying with their deadly breath to daunt them, to turn them back from the  "
"Tirith? For if we must ride now in all haste, then we must  ride light, with "
"Gordan MacFadzean,4017957668072,08-01-1988
"
"     As far  as  he could  remember, Sam slept  through the  night  in  deep "
""
saw 
""
"People,  as  they  call  us.  They  are  (or  were)  a  little  people,  about  half  our  height, "
"####-all was being made ready to depart, up rode Merry and Pippin in great haste.  "
"     Boromir muttered under  his breath, but the echoing stone magnified the "
"     'What do you  think  of that,  Gandalf?' asked Aragorn.  'One would say "
brighter  than  before.  But the air was chill  again; already  the wind was 
"against, against ------' he faltered. "
"     Boromir hesitated for  a second.  `Yes,  and no,'  he  answered slowly. "
"     'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move "
"Leena Siviter,4041593109655,28-09-1981
"
still. A little way off he heard a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on 
"Demetrius Moodey,4041378637219877,21-07-1999
"
"read much  there before it  was spoken. Slowly, while the  others sat silent "
and set them up near the fire. 
has been the darkest road.' 
"way, we must go quick and see. Go! Not far now. Make haste!"" "
     The  hobbits accepted this  second (and far better) supper very gladly. 
"Frodo or  Sam known such darkness, and if  possible  here it was  deeper and "
shall return soon.' 
There was  the usual dim grey  light of  the  forest-day about him when he came 
"guide, "
     'Certainly!'  said Frodo; but his  heart  sank.  He wondered  how  many 
"     And a  voice spoke softly behind:  'In the land of Ithilien, and in the "
halted.  Then the  echoes died as suddenly as  a  flame blown out by a  dark 
"     At the  doors of the Houses many were already gathered to  see Aragorn,  "
roofed in all the accursed land. 
"heard many rumours; but the tale of Gluin was new to him, and when the dwarf "
"Come, Gimli!  You  and  Legolas have mentioned  your  strange  journey  with "
eye went dark. 
"have tried  to catch him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox, "
"They were on ponies, and each pony was  slung about with all kinds of baggages, "
"Kore McKew,4825485784055699,05-03-1984
"
"Cristabel Allix,4041370073975,30-01-1998
"
"questions. Bree memories being retentive,  Frodo was  asked many times if he "
 
the hilt to his master. 
"too am slain. And the more need of haste, if  we two halflings are  all that "
praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.' 
     Though that doesn't do them justice by a long road.' 
"     'I don't like the look of things at all,' said Sam. 'Pretty hopeless, I "
"Yet  hope  there  is  still, if we can  but  stand  unconquered for a little "
that was!' 
"Jessa Torricella,4041375361631,12-12-1978
"
"Althea Bedome,4058160983635,17-10-1998
"
"at her sides, and she watched  them until they passed into the shadows under  "
"splendour grew, recalling  somewhat of the might  of N®menor,  ere it  fell. "
bed. I am going to stand in the rain. Good night!' 
won't get in The Pony so easy.  Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll say 
"appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon. "
"     'Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,' said Aragorn. "
Bywater with a deafening explosion. 
By streams that never find the sea; 
"Sydney Selcraig,4638920683839,04-08-1978
"
go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.' 
west. I  have read  thy  mind  and  its  policies.  Do I  not  know that you  
"     He ran  forward to  the  climbing path, and  over it.  At once the road "
"     `What  are  you going  to do  then? '  asked  Pippin, undaunted  by the "
"not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!"" "
"missing links in his own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would "
"Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we  fall. If we succeed  -- then  we "
"me, under my cloak until we are far afield, and this darkness is yet darker. "
"down  the  wild  wind he came,  and  daring the great peril of the skies  he "
horsemen 
growing but his will  hardened  all the more. He thought  he  could  see the 
"blundering  along,  making  a  noise  like  elephants  which  they  can  hear  a  mile  off. "
"you,  if you have not heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my good cousin "
bridge  that  led  across  the  river  to  the  king's  doors.  The  water  flowed  dark  and 
that is only a few leaves in a forest.' 
"Arvy Jacquest,4041372656535214,23-08-1998
"
"Oft hope is  born, when  all is forlorn."" But what hope  he saw from afar he "
not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze died  away and the River 
"""Chestnuts,  chestnuts,""  he  hissed.  ""Teeth!  teeth!  my  preciousss;  but  we  has "
"Sadie Hansard,4041370398592477,28-10-1994
"
"But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has "
"     `You misunderstand me,' said Frodo. "
     'Will you come with me?' said Beregond. 'You may join my  mess for this 
     mi oromardi lisse-miruvureva 
"Dawna McCarrell,4017952361954,30-07-1983
"
"""Certainly,  O  Thorin  Thrain's  son  Thror's  son!""  was  what  he  said.  ""You  must "
tracks closely. 
"out  of a belt of fir-trees  it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply "
men were hurrying southward from the Fords of  Isen and seemed  to be 
     With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin; 
the whispers  before;  and  then  a chill  blast came in  which  the torches 
"mind,' said Farmer Cotton with a grin. Then  he and his sons ran off towards "
"####-     Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see Gollum "
its great works that could still be seen in this strange border -land  of the 
"some  perils from which a  man  must  flee.  Sit at peace! And be comforted, "
"""No  you  don't!""  be  heard  Dori  answering,  ""because  the  bacon  knows  that  it "
minstrels; 
"the West prove mightier than thy  Black Master, this curse  I  lay upon thee "
selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been  at Bag End. 
"short  or long, don't go wrong.' He took a look up and down the Road. No one "
"fire. The  earth  groaned  and quaked.  The  Towers  of  the  Teeth  swayed, "
"Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a -hunting!' "
"answer;  and then to their  surprise someone blew a horn, and  the lights in "
"hunted  in  the  open  woods,  and  had  houses  or  huts  on  the  ground  and  in  the "
"Gates Licciardo,4041598428493999,02-04-1989
"
"Isahella Kienlein,4017953554171317,29-03-1981
"
"Luciano Goldwater,4362806344305,07-12-1994
"
"is one of my order, but I had not seen him for many a year. "
"barren spur, thrusting  eastward like a wall. To meet it there stretched out "
Do as I bid! It  is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his 
Scouring of  the Shire' reflects the situation in England at the time when I 
sidelong at Gluin -- `I ask them to forget it  and forgive me. I only wished 
bathe feet a minute.' 
"his scorn. ""Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! "
""
####-The  luck  turned  all  right  before  long:  the  eddying  current  carried  several 
"upon their right; to their left rose  grey  slopes, dim  and shadowy in  the "
"bit of wet rope."" "
"     Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said; "
"Dani Asch,4041598872539,06-04-1992
"
""
"Britni McAree,4017956309645311,01-03-1995
"
the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also  that he  had 
the mouth; but  strength  and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs  as 
"may  tell  you,  is  now  less  than  two  days' march  off,  and  has  at  least  five  hundred "
And from that evening onward the Nazgyl came and followed every move  of 
"but  on the  near side there was a path, much broken and decayed, that wound "
sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News from Bree was still a saying 
"Neila Jantzen,4017958704108,03-01-1998
"
     Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. 'The mightiest man may be slain  by 
and were in merrier mood than they had  been  for a year; and  those who had 
"dark and black,  and the home  of dark black  things. This is just dim,  and "
orderly  quickness. Light  tables  were taken from the walls and  set  up on 
"mithril, heirlooms from the glory of old days. Upon  the black surcoats were "
from  the  total  before  putting  in my  own  claim.  However  you  don't  know  Thorin 
"     `And  that, Frodo, is  the end of my account. May Elrond and the others "
"never seen them;  and  some said that they had seen them walking  away west, "
Light sprang in the sky. Night departed. 
"and carried him away. The feasting people were Wood-elves, of course. These are "
"####-no! That came in his tale, long long  ago. This is my  tale, and it is ended "
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.' 
     `We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go  and have a look 
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.' 
""
these to a high thorn-hedge through which you could neither see nor scramble. 
war-beacons of old. 
think -- sun in the dale. Flui was killed by  an arrow.  He slew the  great. 
     'Twenty-one!'  cried  Gimli. He  hewed a two -handed stroke and laid the 
"the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner, and our peril would "
She'll  not  trouble us  tonight  by  all  the signs.'  The  whole  band  of 
     And her hair like shadow following. 
####-halted beside the Withered Tree. 
over their heads; then with another crack  and a yell he started the company 
stained  black  with  goblin  blood.  Just  as  the  goblins  were  recovering  from  the 
himself. Folly! 
"     'Come, come!' said Gandalf. 'We are all friends here. Or should be; for  "
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.' 
 
"thought.  Then suddenly  he realized that  it  was not so,  his  hearing had "
"     'Ah, there  you  lay  your finger on  the  sore  that  many feel!' said "
"about the ruffians, and I've got to get back to Mr. Frodo. But I thought I'd "
"this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly come again.' "
"dream  was little worse than  the  waking. His wrists, legs, and ankles were "
"""What  did  I  tell  you?""  said  Gandalf  laughing.  ""Mr.  Baggins  has more  about "
"Stan Astle,4041376423149670,29-11-1981
"
""
like cattle burns my heart.' 
been  troubl ing him  from the moment when he  understood that hir master was 
"now he could  hear nothing. Yes, he  could hear something,  but not a voice.  "
betray me or slay me now.' 
the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.' 
"star shone  on his breast.  They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed  "
"found was  poor Fredegar Bolger, Fatty no longer. He had been taken when the "
"Debee Sayburn,4231427725749,28-03-1983
"
"between his right  side and  his  bent arm,  there was a hummock,  something "
"that way, branching off  from the  others,  the  marks of small unshod feet. "
 
"more difficult to find, more secret. But  Smjagol knows it. Let Smjagol show "
had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The 
""
"upon  the field, and all night lights were  burning as men  watched for  the "
flows into  the  Bay of Belfalas  whence the  Elves of Lurien set  sa il. But 
"the  master  of  the  Shire-moot, and captain of  the Shire-muster  and  the "
you 
"     He led them a short  way  down a passage, and opened a door. 'Here is a  "
 
behind  had  faded  away.  He  was  altogether  alone.  Soon  he  thought  it  was 
"     'You wait till you are well inside  the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll "
"now, and all song had ceased. Night fell, and there was silence: nothing was "
the throat with beautiful brooches; and Mr. Frodo wore always a  white jewel 
"more and more like that; his face, as I remember  it-I  have not seen it for  "
looked at him mournfully. 
"Clarissa Danit,4041595382011,10-08-1979
"
"the great folk of Durin that once dwelt here, and now are scattered far. If you will "
"of all  their  journey.  They  went first  to  the  little  spring, and then "
Gamgee.  Many  words and  few to  the  point. He  had much to  say about the 
under a swift sunrise. 
"could  not  take his eyes  from  the  old lord.  Was it so, or  had  he only "
"     Buckler and corslet, axe and sword, "
Company. Every  now  and  then we could hear in the distance the rattle  and 
the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted out by a thick drizzle on 
""
with the Wood-elves. Other folk were far away; and some of the younger people in 
times  and the news here. Much has happened  since you  left the South. Your 
completed in S.R. 1592  (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended this  note: 
troubled. 
"'Aragorn, wilt thou go?' "
Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end 
####-and cold!' said Gandalf.  
"and  he was  always grabbing  more, though  where he got  the  money  was  a  "
head he gave  a long whistle. So clear and  piercing was  the  note that the 
"thither, and how could it come there in time?' "
"the household, strong and fair; yet they trembled  at the summons. But in  a  "
""
"     Day was coming again in the world outside, and far beyond the glooms of "
or shouts of battle or din of arms could be heard. Then suddenly there was a  
 
     Pippin  looked  ruefully  at  the  small  loaf  and  (he  thought) very 
"     'There  are evil things written  on  this hilt,' he said; 'though maybe "
"source of the Gladden River, and had come  down into Wilderland and over the "
Thorin shook off his dreams and getting up he kicked away the stone that wedged 
"three hundred of  them in the Shire all told, and  maybe less. We can master  "
""
""
""
"as the shadows of twilight, and upon  it  was set  a circlet  of silver; his "
could  feel  its  hairy  legs  as  it  struggled  to wind  its  abominable  threads  round  and 
said Hbma. He looked hard at  the ash -staff on which Gandalf leaned. 'Yet in 
"####-     `This I will not  have secret,'  said Faramir. `Answer me,  or  I  will "
"the  Great  Ring come  into my hands, and behold!  it was brought  within my "
large doorway reached by  a few  broad  steps. The  door  was open and light 
"Muire Seers,4670562130423,31-01-1991
"
     The trembling starlight of the skies 
see what it is like where the open plain is narrower.' 
"light was already welling through his fingers, he  thrust it into his  bosom "
"     'We shall see,' said Bilbo. "
"long  together, and  Faramir  learned  much, more  even  than Merry put into "
"Matt Wallach,4017958213753,10-01-1987
"
"us ever thought to come,' said Aragorn. "
""
"beneath his  banner,  silent and stern, as one lost in thought of things long "
"suddenly  aware  of  him:  tall  heir  of kings,  wise  with  many  winters, "
"far enough."" "
than 
courage  that he  could muster. `Don't you go taking advantage of my  master 
"     'Of  course, he possessed the ring  for many years,  and used it,  so it "
each of us.  But he does  not yet  perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes 
"on the Wold, for they had  not heard of us before; though that might be said "
"Herb Dizlie,4234824011630111,12-03-1994
"
"one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped the  speaker, and  went "
"moment he lifted up the Phial  and looked down at his master,  and the light  "
"three  foot  high. Already it had  put forth young  leaves long and shapely, "
"     'Then up he came spluttering,  with weeds in his  hair and a handful of "
""
your finger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try!  It would destroy 
"sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me. "
"thought  twice  about  picking  up  a  supper  uninvited  if  he  got  the  chance,  he  had "
"left  mine  in  the  porch!""  ""Just  bring  mine  in  with  you,""  said  Thorin.  They  came "
"marvel! I have wandered in  many lands, since I left my home, and never till "
mention of money or jewellery: not a  penny-piece or  a glass bead was given 
Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!' 
 
"duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if you  are "
"wood.  They rested and had a light  meal, talking quietly and listening from "
"     'No good  hiding in the  dark,' said Gollum. 'It's in day that  hobbits "
"Faramir was retreating to the wall of  the Pelennor, rallying his men to the "
"     'I don't know,' said Frodo. It came to me then, as  if I was making  it "
"Aragorn gave it a new name and called it And®ril, Flame of the West. "
"about the steep shores of the  isle, and falls then  with a  great noise and "
"tiring,' said Frodo.  'I am wide awake  now, and  I remember so many  things "
"     'Oathbreakers, why have ye come?' "
"fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet "
"Steffane Colebrook,4041593401177,27-01-1981
"
position dangerous.' 
     'I am hungry. What is the time?' 
him 
"not  so  badly  off  now.  He  slipped  from  his  barrel  and  waded  ashore,  and  then "
"there.  In the  stern  sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding "
"lust of battle was on him; and he was still unscathed, and he was young, and "
"reckless and eager than Boromir, but  not less resolute. Yet what indeed can "
still  seemed to live in his old breathless bustle. And yet there was hardly 
"jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not "
"watch-tower on  the cliff. Must of  them were gleeful,  delighted with  what "
terrible voice. 'Down on  your belly!  How long is it  since  Saruman bought 
"Orodruin, where Gil-galad  died, and  Elendil fell, and Narsil broke beneath  "
"But I beg you two, Legolas  and Gimli, at least  to  be friends, and to help "
"while,  looking  through  the   window   at  the  bright  stars  above   the "
I  ever saw with daisies  in  her hair in  springtime.  But that's a lot  o' 
means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey. It is likely too that 
"     He rose clumsily and bowed  in dwarf-fashion, saying: `Yet more fair is "
and  we may  trust  his  words.  He  saw  him  fall  in  battle  with  the men  of  Esgaroth 
secret and known only to myself.' 
"before you'd had bite or sup, he did.' "
came here  two days ago  and bore  them away to his  dwelling far off by the  
that it was not  for any merit that others do not possess: not for  power or  
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement. 
"     `No, no!'  cried Frodo, snatching the  Ring and chain from Sam's hands.  "
"time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, maybe, which no  choice of mine can "
     At  last  Merry stirred and whispered softly: 'So  far so good: but how 
"men of many sorts, hunters and herdsmen and men of little villages, scantily "
"Maury Bremmer,4041370629530718,12-06-1985
"
make a house.' 
for some time. 
as he shut the door on her. 
"Derrick Skelington,4017955114929761,04-07-1999
"
"Issiah Graal,4041590105007275,08-02-1981
"
them it holds an  even deadlier peril.  The very  desire of it  corrupts the 
"the edge. Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, for  "
"Lucias O'Shee,4902595850655,09-01-1985
"
"Catie Ebbage,4497254755129454,30-07-1979
"
Mountain seemed to frown at him and threaten him as it drew ever nearer. After a 
"the edge of  a noble hunger, or for fear of me, I do not know. But it is not "
"it with a dreadful gash, but those hideous folds could not be pierced by any "
"ruin among  the  orcs  innumerable  that guarded  it, their bodies were cast  "
as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what ----' 
"Darline Pacht,4041595212135,07-12-1981
"
way?' 
remain Galadriel.' 
"So  Bilbo  told  them  all  he  could  remember,  and  he  confessed  that  he  had  a "
     'What fellow do you mean?' asked Pippin. 
So  now  there  was  nothing  left  to  do  but  to  fill  their  water-skins  at  a  clear 
"twitching. Sam watched him, till  night covered them both and hid them  from "
"me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.' "
"     The  hobbits  seated themselves  beside  him, one on  either side. with "
"enemy,  as one by one all who  could  gain the  stair passed up  towards the "
""
"had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he came. He did not speak so  "
could not pierce the mists ahead. 
already mounted. It would be a   great company; for the king was leaving only 
"Karyl Dawson,4041597801224,19-05-1983
"
"     Stern now  was Jomer's mood, and  his mind clear again. He let blow the "
"was never a sign of Gollum, who had slipped off as  soon as  the others  had "
"     'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do? ' "
in the darkness: he himself had  found the marvellous  ring and a chance  of 
"The next will be greater.  This war  then is without final hope, as Denethor  "
"north and east and west, and each window was full of sleepless eyes. "
""
"     'Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,' said Frodo. 'He "
"guard and servant of your captain, and to be at his side when he awakes  - if "
 
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards. 
No Orc or other living creature could be seen. 
""
"changes  his  skin;  sometimes  he  is  a  huge  black  bear,  sometimes  he  is  a  great "
"Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and  prosperous, and no more "
"his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of  the Ring, as if a great "
"surlily. 'I've told you twice that Gorbag's swine got to the gate first, and "
both 
"""Whatever  were  you  doing  there?""  asked  Thorin  with  a  shudder,  and  all  the "
to the door. 'Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.' 
"his  shoulder.  His eyes  smouldered  with  anger, but  he could  not avenge "
"at  the  slain,  recalling their  names. Then suddenly he beheld  his sister  "
"pale; the  stars were fading, and a grey light was  slowly growing. A little "
"with  tilling  the  earth.  All  this  was  well  known  to  every  dwarf,  though  Thorin's "
     Gandalf  led them to the porch where  Frodo had found  his  friends the 
crept.  They  passed  a  door  through which  the  chief  guard  and  the  butler  could  be 
"     `It  looks  like  a tomb,' muttered  Frodo,  and  bent forwards with  a  "
slowly  away. The  travellers  sat still  without moving or speaking. On the 
camp was soon astir. 
"     At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst and "
"cries of the Orcs  as they came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in "
"rocks. As long as they could they avoided  climbing  for  Frodo's  sake, and "
"     'The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,' said Gildor. "
"lo! he had between his hands  a palantnr. And as he held it up, it seemed to "
see him. He  got up and  crept  quietly away from  the  fireside towards the 
""
landlord  seems  to  have heard something. Why did  he press us to join  the 
the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind  them the sinking Sun filled  the  cool  
Let's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!' 
"     `You have not tried,' she said. `Only thrice have you set the Ring upon "
"Darnall Vinas,4017956960116,19-04-1979
"
"tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.' "
     and voices at the door. 
"     'Some  twenty-five leagues as a  bird flies,' answered  Faramir. 'But I "
"instead.  I  hoped  to have a rest, but I can see there's work  and  trouble "
by the devices of Saruman  that we drove him  from Dol  Guldur. It might  be 
"####-for its sharpness, nor the arrow for  its swiftness, nor the warrior for his "
"Then he took  Faramir's hand in  his, and laid the other hand  upon the sick  "
"bare,  cold-gleaming in  the sunlight. At  the far  southern end  rose three "
"them, as if   the green  flame had  sunk deeper into the  dark  wells of  his "
     Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. `I  know that haste 
"     `I  made  that  up myself,' he whispered to Frodo, `for the  D®nadan, a  "
in the homes of Men. The vale was rich and many folk dwelt there. 
"stems above the  flood. but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it  seemed, "
""
unwise and evil counsels that beset  you!  Is it yet  too late? Despite  the 
"hissing through closed teeth. Then coming  up, close  to the stem, Frodo saw "
"Marni Skeath,4041376884601888,09-12-1995
"
"     'I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before him "
"truth, I had very little hope; for  I suspected that there was some fragment "
"desperate night. Fires  now raged unchecked in the first circle of the City, "
####-empty since the  children of Durin fled. But now we  spoke of  it again with  
friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting  hasty  -- growing 
"     They  could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he wore "
many tales about the Tower of the Moon.' 
"beginning to feel warm. ""Is that a kind of a glow I seem to see coming right ahead "
them down shrieking and bewildered among their foes. It was not long before they 
"meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger.' "
They  sat  long  at  the  table with  their wooden  drinking-bowls filled with mead. 
"     'Yes, I shall be moving  this autumn,' he  said.  'Merry Brandybuck  is "
Then 
will strike more swiftly.' 
"Getting  rid  of  dragons  is  not  at  all  in  my  line,  but  I  will  do  my  best  to  think "
"the caves, they may seal up those that are inside.  But now we must turn all "
"the land when the hart bore down on him, and sprang over him. He had stumbled, "
"go for further information. But after a time, a s Frodo did not show any sign "
"have round shields,  yellow and black with big  spikes. Not nice; very cruel "
shoulders 
the Mark of old the Cunning Mind. 
"steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty  leagues  and more "
you know Gandalf?' 
"####-the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of "
""
"sounded like  a curse. He lifted his head, and they  thought  they heard him "
"like  rows  of old  and hungry teeth. He wondered what they could be, and he "
"on  the pale margins of the Anduin, but the  sky was clear. Stars  came out. "
"to find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor.  I do not think  that he is in "
"""We have the honour to remain "
"Gay Doog,4820175810842,21-07-1989
"
latest two  nights  ago; but he has  never appeared. Now I am wondering what 
     'Mithrandir!' he cried. 'Mithrandir!' 
could pierce the night  in the East. 'Cirith Ungol!' he  muttered. 'Why that 
told.' 
""
arrows were spent. When  they came into the  glade they halted in amazement; 
"Lincoln Skeldon,4041596791558943,25-02-1976
"
peering up  the  stairs  into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear  the 
entered a narrow  opening in the rock. They had come to the first stair that 
####-the door had still been open I don't like to think. They fled further down the tunnel 
####-     Suddenly  Tom's talk  left  the woods and  went leaping  up  the  young 
"     And she answered: 'All  your words are but to say: you are a woman, and "
otherwise and that they might welcome such folk as friends; but Thorin scowled. 
"history has ever gone beyond playing, and  really done it.  He needed all my "
"king knew now the dwarves' errand, or thought he did, and he said to himself: "
"true story, and  if some here have heard  me tell it otherwise'  -- he looked "
     for ever still a herald on 
"Stafford Salvador,4236948685683698,16-08-1982
"
     Away below Shagrat went leaping  down the stairs and out over the court 
"stars. Frodo and  his companions  huddled  round the fire, wrapped   in every "
Fate has not been  kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of the  ruin of 
orc-trail. We may get new s from them.' 
in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he 
"that fair land, and to the Elves, and he hoped that the cloth woven by their "
"and  he  became  King  under  the  Mountain,  and  in  time  many  other  dwarves "
"Rudd Pagnin,4041596632347373,18-03-1983
"
free days of old.' 
he knew his deadly peril and the thread upon which his doom now hung. 
could come at last to the help of the battle below.  
     Not all that was  spoken and debated in the  Council need now  be told. 
"Why's none of my business, or yours.  Where to?  That ain't no  secret. He's "
"     As before, Sam found  that his  hearing was sharpened, but  that to his "
"####-was spilled  there,  a few paces away, orc-blood. There  are  deep prints of "
"Moses Scrinage,4017958961906,10-11-1999
"
"carried some of his gear in his pack: a  small tinder -box, two small shallow "
"will be too late."" "
we do not know your companion. What  is he?  A dwarf out of the mountains 
"said Gandalf; 'but since he is not here,  I must take this on  myself. I bid "
father is the sit and twentieth) that they rode  to our aid and at the great 
"nod, he invited Frodo to come over  and sit  by  him. As  Frodo drew near be  "
fear him. But nobler is his spirit than  the understanding of Sauron; for is 
"for ourselves.  For, my  lords,  it may  well prove  that we ourselves shall "
"     'He fled, certainly,' said Aragorn, 'but not, I think, from Orcs.' What "
"     I stand in Minas Anor, the Tower of the Sun,  she  said; and behold the "
"passage-threshold, saw a flicker  of light in an open doorway, and  the  dim "
"he were given  the Ring,  he would soon  forget  it, or most likely throw it "
and he flung  his grey cloak about his shoulders; and  the  three passed out 
feet the highest ridge  of the Ephel D®ath fell steeply in great cliffs down 
"Bullroarer, who was so huge (for a hobbit)  that he could ride a horse. He charged "
"had not been for the disturbing events  of the night before, they would have "
"     'Hope,  yes,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard  is strong. And  other perils "
"Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to "
"could not get by. So I jumped over him and escaped, and ran down to the gate."" "
"Cindie Moxom,4041370410144034,06-02-1980
"
""
"####-take Precious, and I shall say: make  him swallow the bones and choke. Never  "
slipped into the wat 
"and weaponless, and I will hear,"" he called to the messenger.  "
"hills, but they were few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of "
'Gandalf!' he cried. 'Gandalf! Forgive me!' 
"might have  been  some  comfort  to Mr. Baggins  shivering on  the barrels,  if he had "
"     'Eight  out of the Nine are  accounted for at least, ' said Gandalf. 'It "
them. 
     'Who is it?' said a voice. 'What do you wish?' 
"Natalee Meyer,4017958177305,26-06-1998
"
"Leonidas Tompkins,4041597261965,29-12-1997
"
"of his  will, had he taken the Ring to  himself.  Not for naught does Mordor  "
"Alejoa Joseff,4017953880227403,26-10-1983
"
gave 
"     'No, you  don't,  Sam!' said  Pippin.  'It is  good  for him. He's  got "
"Rabi Seeking,4027020213848,08-07-1979
"
"     'Eavesdropping,  sir? I don't  follow you, begging  your pardon.  There "
     'And I've heard tell  that Elves are moving west. They do  say they are 
"spare for  incomers, and ere long  the Hobbits began  to  settle in  ordered "
There was a flat space on the top of the hill of stone and a well worn path with 
""
"towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but "
"realms, such  as  have never before  been gathered  in  this  hall! Faramir, "
"Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed  for the end of  a race. Then he saw that "
"I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into  it "
"a  great tide their battle swept about their fallen king and passed, roaring "
"Clayborn Checcucci,4041591002237460,08-09-1985
"
"lived  and walked the earth was a blow  to his heart, I deem; for he knew it "
"""Small  wonder,""  said  they,  ""when  the  explanation  stands  close  at  hand  in  a "
"blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that voice "
has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while. That I 
"     'I'll crawl, Sam,' he gasped. "
"that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for  "
now  it came from the North  and began  to rise; and slowly the light of the 
"burned;  and all  across  the gap an earth-wall had been  raised, and a deep "
"Harley McDermott,4403706823605669,03-06-1977
"
that any sound from  behind seemed ominous and  unfriendly. But Strider  was 
"Crissy Cappleman,4041593202336,20-03-1984
"
"     'Well, what is it?' "
     Then a minstrel and loremaster stood up and  named all the names of the  
"traitor, and with that reward he shall depart, and you can divide it as you will. He "
"lake, when  they were  tunnelling down  long ago, and  they  found  they could go no "
lived  a  good  way  away;  and  he  never  invited  more  than  a  couple  of  these  to  his 
"dragon came on them and destroyed most of the warriors-the usual unhappy story, "
"and looked  away east into the haze, beyond which lay the River, and the end "
"brow, and bending down spoke softly to him. "
"     'Surely you see it, my friend?' he said, turning  now suddenly to Frodo "
"dead leaves and  occasionally  stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud  in "
"####-brooded,  nor with  dwarvish  hearts. Long hours  in  the past days Thorin had  spent "
"become  Book Four,  were  written  and  sent  out  as  a  serial  to my son, "
"glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, 'you may ask what  is the use "
"from the North back again to North, and saw nothing save  the distant hills,  "
"you must realize that your success has made you some bitter enemies?"" "
"a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him. "
"Austin Manntschke,4017958105043519,16-12-1982
"
"Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the "
"time they could get nothing more out of him, he was so busy sending smoke-rings "
     'Yess! Yess indeed! There was another  way. Smjagol found it. Let's  go 
with singed beards. They looked very grim but they said very little. When I asked 
answered Gandalf; 'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little 
"Thorin.  ""Come  here  Fili,  and  see  if  you  can  see  the  boat  Mr.  Baggins  is  talking "
probably  u seless; but it must be done.  Those of you who wish may come with 
his  luck with  the map after your grandfather was killed; and  lots of adventures of 
the key!' said Merry. But  the ruffian flung it  at his head and then darted 
     The  king now went down  the stair  with Gandalf beside him. The others 
""
"river, as  the  roads out of  the East  towards Mirkwood vanished or  fell  into disuse; "
and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff. 
am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us? All my choices 
the Elves would reckon it.' 
     Sam was eager for  an answer to the same question and could not refrain 
"and the others took new hope, hearing of a manful  deed within their measure "
With beards all a-wagging? 
almost like a hedge. 
fifteen feet deep and about  a dozen across. There  was running water at the 
to them all away there.' He  waved his  hand vaguely  in the air before him; 
"favour, then you  also are  net -weavers and  sorcerers,  maybe.' He turned a  "
"""Never  a  blinking  bit  of  manflesh  have  we  had  for  long  enough,""  said  a "
his guess good or bad.' 
 
"from  the  ruin  long  ago. Now  he  shot with  a  great yew bow,  till all his arrows but "
guessed. At Bilbo's front door the old man began to unload: there were great 
""
"together with bowstrings, and spread their  cloaks upon the frame. Upon this "
him?' 
"professional assistance our grateful acceptance. Terms: cash on delivery, up to "
"writing  his  memoirs  –  he  thought  of  calling  them  ""There  and  Back  Again,  a "
"across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking "
"""Very good,"" laughed the chief of the guards. ""I'll taste with you, and see if it is "
a short cut. But we are not at  the point  to which our pass would have brought us; 
seen. But it isn't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lurien. And 
and yet giving slowly back; and the elf-lords were at bay about their king upon the 
is not true of Gimli. For  none have ever  made to me a request  so bold and 
not speak  again. Sam gave him  a mouthful  of water; only one more mouthful 
"####-uncovered,  but he was  clad in a  travel-stained cloak of the same  hue and "
"Avram Youngs,4041375624382254,20-11-1977
"
"####-bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow hole and laid  his fuel "
"green, "
     From Evereven's lofty hills 
eyes were shining and she was smiling at him. 
the covert they watched for the slow growth of day. 
"Cathee Mitchell,4041599423585102,31-08-1981
"
"against  bitter weather:  you will  not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we "
saw it too. And do you remember the report of the  Elves that went after the  
"what we wanted was fire and food!"" "
Rohirrim of such 'shire-words' as mathom and old elements in place names. 
"pressure was, he felt no  inclination now to yield to it. He  knew that  the "
"     'You have not said  all  that you know or guess, Aragorn my  friend,' he "
"     'The New Age begins,' said Gandalf, 'and in this age it may  well prove "
son of Gluin!' he said. 'I did not know that you were with us in the sortie. 
"walking  in the dark,' he said,  'so let's put  some miles  behind us before "
"""I will  not  parley,  as  I  have  said, with  armed men  at my  gate. Nor  at all with "
""
"Sophia Eliet,4041594285884,01-03-1978
"
"Heriberto Librey,4020862364358805,03-06-1989
"
time for all the questions that he immediately wished to ask. 
was hidden  by a fold of the ground: but for some time his hey now! hoy now! 
"     'Not  much use  are you,  you little snufflers?' said the  big  orc. 'I  "
of fallow gold. 
"     'You should  be  glad, Thjoden  King,' said Gandalf. 'For not only  the "
"Faint as was the  hope that his  guess brought him, it  was enough to  rouse "
"""Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest and still  has the best sight,"" said "
to it. For many years we used to go out every now and again and look for the 
"crack, just as it snapped to. He followed after the drivers and prisoners right to the "
"whereas he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly "
"     'Well, do  as you think best!' said Fredegar. 'I am more afraid of  the "
who had laughed at all the talk about the King began to think there might be 
"ponder it. If Shagrat got away, he would soon get help and come back. But if "
"Not  far  away  was  his  island,  of  which  Bilbo  knew  nothing,  and  there  in  his "
separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and  Merry had run off into  the 
autumn  fields. They  did  not desire  to  speak with these things; but they 
"upon  their  great steeds  like  threatening  statues  upon a hill, dark and "
"     At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on  the ground, and he heard "
close at hand. 
"now that starting is too great a claim for  any, and that only  a small part "
"notice in  the light of the lanterns, he  tore it down and threw it over the "
mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!' 
slippery with dark blood. 
"Robinet Sparshott,4017957219967,21-04-1978
"
"Hal Cocking,4041379510205108,03-07-1976
"
no horse.' 
"Goldy Rope,4041371604098986,14-03-1981
"
     He stooped. Very gently he undid  the clasp at the neck and slipped his 
said. 'For you have already grown  since I saw you last.'  And  they laughed 
"     hm, hm. "
"     'But  my  lord of  Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because valiant "
"beginning, when  first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But "
"saucer and an extra cake or two, and ran to the door.  "
"I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.' "
"of need, Brego and his son Baldor climbed the Stair of the  Hold and so came "
"upon  the brown hair  of the hobbit;  he blessed  him. 'Rise  now, Meriadoc, "
"who passed the tale of  five score years with vigour were grown few, save in  "
it.' 
foreboded  that tha t will only be  when we have  both  lost all  that we now 
"the hills, came falling like silver to meet them: "
"then he remembered! He rushed and put on the kettle, and put out another cup and "
wall of rock and bowed his head. 
"sing,  or  croak,  keeping  time  with  the  flap  of  their  flat  feet  on  the  stone,  and "
"Donnie McNirlan,4740155043321255,12-02-1995
"
have been entirely buried. 
"     'Strange indeed,' said Legolas. 'In that  hour I  looked on Aragorn and "
"slow to quarrel, and for sport killing nothing that lived, they were doughty "
laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe and drink. We spent a busy 
"Xever Rimmer,4997963915007,18-08-1985
"
"     Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. 'So you go  on,' he cried. "
"dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Ther efore they were called the "
"all  that you  have  cured.  Come, sit down!  And if you have any pipe-weed, "
"and Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news of his "
"     'That, I think, no one will ever know,' said Gandalf. "
"Porty Richardes,4017958264813439,25-06-1998
"
"wheeled round towards it, and cast themselves down, holding their hands upon "
"There it seemed to  Frodo that he descried far off, floating as it were on a  "
was answered. 
"Rising  Moon,  eastward  upon  a shoulder of the  Mountains  of  Shadow; and "
"Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whether "
"we do our best in this  House with what we have, as  I am sure your lordship "
"ground,  and he lay as he fell, till black dreams  took  him. But he did not "
"Moria again,  l  would have forbidden you to pass the  northern borders, you  "
""
####-only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not.  It is wisdom to 
"heard  Sam's voice  speaking. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  Wake up! ' Had the voice "
and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded them to sit again on the 
"     'I wish Merry  was here,' he  heard himself saying, and quick  thoughts "
"cold  from  the heights  no  lanterns  glowed, no fires  were  lit. Watchmen "
remarkable Mr. Invisible Baggins (of whom he began to have a very high opinion 
"Wadsworth Jochanany,4017959165129099,13-08-1986
"
"wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you have "
last he was slain defending me from many foes.' 
"and  that was how  it  was all  discovered. And  Mithrandir,  he said to me: "
"the proper time I should know. After that we went away, and we have had to earn "
####-great Ugl®k will lead us out again.' 
behind. He wanted to rush straight off into the wood after the lights. But the others 
above the outer pass. He touched Sam's arm and pointed. 
"guessed  as well  as  he  could,  and  crawled  along  for  a  good way,  till  suddenly  his "
among the Rulers of the city  that is not spread abroad. We of  my house are 
There Frodo and  Sam learned much  of all that had happened to  the  Company 
"know that tongue.  It is an ancient speech  of men, and  once  was spoken in  "
"     'How should I  know?  He's welcome to go  where he will, so long as  he  "
"     'Then Hal can't have  seen one,' said Ted. There  was some laughing and "
"the  top,  with  one  hand,  while  the  hobbit  ran  after  them  almost  squeaking  with "
don't go to sleep on the way!' 
"together; and he said to  her: 'Jowyn, why  do you tarry here, and do not go "
"     `Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next! ' said Sam. "
"from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that  had come up the "
the Guard-towers upon the Causeway. Together they strolled out to the walls;  
"and  shook  from  head  to  toe. When  he  peeped  out  in  the  lightning-flashes, he saw "
"Elena Krink,4556039587583145,04-08-1982
"
"something, lilting  it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there "
"He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. And we do see. O yes.  my "
"     At last the three companions  turned away, and never again looking back  "
will help you back to the Healers. But do not fear! They will come back. The 
token of your truth that you also know them.' 
""
Bilbo  sneezed  again.  He  was  no  longer  dripping  but  he  felt  cold  all  over.  He 
"has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they "
""
"let  down the light ladder. Up  came Sam, puffing, heaving a great bundle on  "
were  far less heavy than any  had  expected.  Of what  tree growing in  the 
     Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that he heard his master calling.  It was 
"     Gilthoniel, A! Elbereth! "
"alarm for  a moment before he gasped: 'I have seen  them, Frodo! I have seen "
"Aloysius McBeith,4041590888681,07-05-1979
"
moving  restlessly. Tom came out  of the house and  waved his hat and danced 
"East -gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.' "
"Fielding Carlet,4041599771384645,24-11-1984
"
"Pippin poured out  his tale, reaching up  and  touching  Gandalf's knee with "
"dozed a little on some dry leaves, even though the year was getting late and the air "
"     'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other. "
The lord of silver fountains 
"""So I did. And don't be silly! You had better go to bed, your wits are sleepy."" "
"Arte Rilings,4041594257704648,16-02-1989
"
"somehow he managed it. The light faded from the cave door, and the grey veil "
"movement,  and  he  avoided  the  touch of  their elven-cloaks; but  he  was "
troubled me deeply. But there  was so  much at stake that I had to take some 
of Barad-dyr. Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor;  and 
at  then  both  with  a  branch  to  bring  them  to  their  senses-and  that  of  course  only 
in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was 
were  continuing  some  debate  that  had  begun  long before.  He  listened 
a deadly light and were afraid. 
"sends word  to you: The days now are short.  Either our hope cometh, or  all  "
"     `Yes,  it all  comes  back  to  me now,'  said  Frodo:  'the tremendous "
"     They went along many paths and climbed many  stairs, until they came to "
"them darkly for a moment, and then slowly  opened the gate and let them ride "
"     Merry got up. 'Yes,' he said, 'I can  manage it. Lembas does put  heart "
"their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled "
"Valina Tighe,4041376788733,19-03-1994
"
"     `What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?' asked Merry. "
"     `He suspects, but  he  does not  know  --  not  yet. Do you not see now "
"tower of  marvellous shape.  It  was  fashioned by  the builders of old, who "
     / hope you  are  all  enjoying yourselves as much as  I  am.  Deafening 
"Shell Charlon,4017957851634893,16-10-1980
"
     'But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them  or not ' said 
will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? ' 
"land of the Entwives blossomed richly,  and their  fields were full of corn. "
Some of the ruffians were going up with a big cart. 
seem  wise themselves.  When others  spoke  they seemed harsh and uncouth 
"came when we heard the horn-but too late, it  seems. I  fear  you have taken "
"to keep his mind occupied, began to walk to and fro, prying and peering into "
"feet.  I am  taller  than you. But then my father  is  a  Guard, one of  the "
"Eli Gillott,4601821716082,14-02-1978
"
"cannot  destroy  Orthanc from without, but  Sauron  -- who knows  what he can "
"Hastie Jepson,4041374328244670,28-08-2000
"
"forty armed guards. I thought to myself 'even if they were not all chained together, "
"Mychal Lansly,4041594023152,02-06-1988
"
     'Then why didn't  he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't  he 
"Kienan Kitley,4041599799467,06-03-1990
"
nigh to the sea.' 
""
seemed to them  that he was revealed to them now for the first time. Tall as 
north-west  there  was  a  deeper darkness  against  the  dying  light:  the 
"away. Soon all  the inside  seemed on fire;  the ball  was spinning,  or the "
the Hall of the Kings and pronounced his judgements. And embassies came 
"swirled  over  and  round  the  arms  of  the  Mountain  into  the  valley,  and  sighed "
"     And some  said: 'They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they belong,  "
"     'There  now!' said  Mr.  Butterbur,  snapping  his fingers. 'It's  gone "
"people  benighted  near  their  gates. Evidently  people  had  given  up  going  that way, "
from  it a  shaft of  white light  stabbed upwards.  The Nazgyl  gave a long 
"him back. He  is weary now, and grieved, and  he has taken a hurt  like  the "
"we  give,  not  even  a  loaf's  worth,  under  threat  of  force. While  an  armed host  lies "
"crying the name of Thjoden, and the challenge of the guard. "
     And Jowyn  looked at Faramir long and  steadily; and Faramir  said: 'Do 
"their left  were overhung, and they could  not be seen  from above; but  the "
"going straight,  without mishap  or  losing our  way, we shall take three or  "
     Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and slamming of 
"with me in  Bag End too? But my dear  Sam, how easy! Get  married as soon as "
found the way. 
"Gasper Athowe,4548063576484629,30-08-1998
"
"     A pale smile, like a gleam of  cold sun  on a winter's evening,  passed "
"and  as  if  all  their  talk  was  about  cruel  and  wicked  things,  as  it  was.  Every  now "
"Turn and about, same as before, while he's loose.' "
"Trueman Jeckells,4017956768470383,26-11-1997
"
"     'Hoom, hom! Here we  come with a  boom, here  we come at last!'  called  "
"     Pippin  trembled, fearing  that Gandalf would be stung to sudden wrath, "
"tobacco.  So  after  that  the  party  went  along  very  merrily,  and  they  told  stories  or "
"come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.' "
weariness could quench the  fire that burned them.  They seldom spoke.  Over  
"Miran Daw,4017951489855,30-07-1988
"
"behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.' "
"Barrie Liggens,4017953088262350,15-10-1983
"
"off, eastward,  say, to the Great River,  towards Mordor, we might pass  the "
"preciousss? Is it juicy? Is it scrumptiously crunchable?"" He began to peer at Bilbo "
"     'Well,  I  saw what I  saw,  and  I saw what I  didn't,'  said  Mugwort "
""
our company! You had best walk in the middle so  that you may not stray. You  
towards the night gathering in the East. 'There is something strange at work 
"lots  of  clothes,  too,  hanging  on  the  walls-too  small  for  trolls,  I  am  afraid  they "
"speech  long  rehearsed.  ""The Elder Days  are gone.  The  Middle  Days  are "
"talking and my walking, and my watching of the country.  Tom can't be always "
wouldn't know me. 
"He could make out little more on the dark plain,  and as yet he  neither saw "
"Drusilla Stegell,4017951000561,18-03-1996
"
"Hills  plunged  in,  wielding  their  mattocks,  upon  the  other  side;  and  beside  them "
"could  not  lift  his  hand  for  a  single  stroke  more,  the  spiders  suddenly  gave  it  up, "
hang  down  the  cliff  to  the  valley  before  anything  happens  here.  What  is  our 
"####-     His  own  plan, while Gandalf remained with  them, had been to go  with "
"discover no more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think. "
"through rows of new  mean houses along each side of the  road, they saw  the "
"head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came over the still face, and "
     But what be bones that lie in a  hole? 
"banner of the Elvenking and the blue banner of the Lake, and they advanced until "
"you had near forgotten! Come now,  my  merry  friends, and Tom  will refresh "
home. 
"     'You  think,  as  is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,' said Gandalf. "
""
Somebody made the 
"seeing nothing, and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in their ears. "
"""The  Eagles!  the  Eagles!""  Bilbo  cried,  dancing  and  waving  his  arms.  If  the "
but not  in  the  same place. They  removed northward higher up  the  shore;  for  ever 
"the  lands  of  respectable  people,  it  seemed  a  bad  wet  evening  to  begin,  on.  They "
stones  and boulders lying thick at  the bottom of  the  great  ravine.  But 
"like it, Sam?'  he sneered. 'But  you always  was soft. I thought you'd gone  "
would last for  many  uneventful years. Most of  the inhabitants of Bree and  
"####-getting into my  heart.  As I lay in  prison,  Sam. I tried to  remember the "
     'Enough!' shouted Ugl®k running  up. 'He's still got to run a long  way 
"Kimbell Rampley,4041596567616552,15-04-1990
"
"Zebedee Dommett,4751818909057,03-08-1985
"
with him and put him in his place.' 
"Zena Riteley,4017957927382147,13-03-1976
"
"upright before her, and her hands were laid upon the hilt. She was  clad now "
"     `I  can walk  this path,' said  Legolas; `but the others have not  this "
"     'What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to me tonight?  "
"off  to  sleep  one  by  one.  And  that  was  the  last  time  that  they  used  the  ponies, "
"debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But may we not "
`And  useful.  It  is my dwarf-mail that  Thorin gave me. I got it back from 
"""Welcome to the valley!"" he said. "
"     Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind on "
heights above. 
with grey tears.  It was through a mist that presently he saw the van of the 
and  looked  about.  At  once he saw  that up  here the  fighting  had  been 
pointed to where the tree. had stood under which Bilbo had made his Farewell 
####-Back to gardens on the hills 
"him  with  dog-like delight. He  chuckled and  chattered,  cracking his long "
his  Gate by  night  and  now marched in to swell  his mounting power. As if 
     You won't think I'm true; 
"lake roared  in. A vast steam  leaped up, white  in  the sudden dark under  the moon. "
"     'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion "
although  he  looked  and  behaved  exactly  like  a  second  edition  of  his  solid  and 
the high places and saw before them amid a wide  lawn a fountain shimmering. 
"Sheba Crimes,4041370573487,04-08-1993
"
'Let Frodo come  next and  with him  Legolas. The others may follow  as they 
bear 
"late! Too late was worse  than never! Perhaps Thjoden would  quail,  bow his "
though the  identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee put it 
"Thorpe Goreway,4041371519349,25-12-1976
"
"and longest in evil servitude,  hating the West, and yet were men  proud and "
"the shadows flickering on the walls, said softly: "
"     `Then it was  late in coming,' said Gandalf, 'as you will see. I was in "
"had brought it along as well, snatching it from one of the terrified guards. Gandalf "
"was only marching music and no more, just a song  -- until I got here. I know "
"     'Halbarad D®nadan, Ranger  of the North I am,' cried the man. 'We  seek  "
"no  notice,  ""and  so  to  the  ruins  of Dale-the old  town  in  the valley  there, under  the "
     Few mortal eyes have seen the light 
"strongholds of Mordor. The  Dark Tower had been rebuilt,  it was  said. From "
"     'Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he said, 'but have you any notion how "
"     With a cry Sam  leapt across  the floor, Sting in hand. The orc wheeled "
"going now on leave, but I may recall you.  And remember, dear friends of the "
"     Even as he spoke,  there came forward out of  the  trees three  strange "
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.' 
"     'Perhaps  not,'  said Sam abashed. 'But I'm hurrying now. We're setting "
"counted  themselves  it  only  made  thirteen.  They  shouted  and  called:  ""Bilbo "
####-     The starlight on the Western Seas. 
"cloth.  It was  a  beautiful  gold-en harp, and when Thorin struck it the music began "
"     'Did he!' said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on "
"hall, save the branches  of  the trees, which  at the inner end overshadowed "
power  that  set to  work on  its keeper at once.  That was the  first  real 
     Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains! 
"the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope "
"Carlita Overstreet,4041372010066,17-03-1984
"
"could  reach that point, maybe it would prove easier  beyond. It  is no more "
"Alan Fontel,4840411424398118,28-01-1987
"
"draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Thjoden,  when we are gone. Lead your people "
warn them that  the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with 
"Corny Flippelli,4017957448269,29-10-1978
"
Chapter 12. Flight to the Ford 
"he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought "
"     Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing? "
"fear-and the treasure is ours!"" "
"about? Nothing, Sam Gamgee; but you've got to keep awake  all the same.' And "
     `Don't worry!'  said Frodo. `There's  no help  for it. But  he'll  come 
"quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom the ghosts "
there  the  drip  of  it  was  dropping  heavily  on  the  forest  floor.  That  only  reminded 
""
"wake him up (""but with never a thank-you"" he thought); and yet in a way he could "
"had  hurried  on  through  the  night,  and  so  had  come  upon  them  sooner  than  they "
""
"     But at last she said:  'Lords, you are weary and  shall now  go to  your "
"darkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring  a  ding dillo! Wake now,  my  "
"Just  crept  quietly  along  did  you,  Mr.  Baggins?  Buttons  all  over  the  doorstep? "
sad and thoughtful. 
     'What then is your wisdom?' said Gandalf. 
"Ellary Gudahy,4041592316624,30-03-1992
"
""
"greedy, but  contented and moderate, so  that estates, farms, workshops, and "
Soon  the sound of  their  soft  breathing  could be  heard. Gollum's  hands 
"     'Nay,  Gandalf!' said  the king.  'You do not know your  own  skill  in "
"of Erech ere this day passes, and long still is the way.' So without looking "
dwarf came and hung his things up in your hall without a word of explanation? 
shadows under Cirith Ungol. 
"     `He would not take  it,' said  Frodo.  'He would  follow after me as he "
For the whatever -it-was was coming along fast now and  getting close  behind 
""
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.' 
woods hardly noticed their passing. 
"them  over,  then  gathered  itself  for  a  leap.  High  it  sprang  and  cleared  the  water "
"send  out a brief farewell  gleam before  the night, even as Frodo saw it a t "
"smouldering  stone,  but  he  could  afford  to  wait.  Slow  and  silent  he  crept  back  to "
"Jomer will return hither to bear Thjoden back to rest  in  the Mark, and  we "
     'He cannot stand alone! ' cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the 
first light  of day had not  yet come over the dark  hills behind.  For  the 
"watchers. Now they were drawing near,  and it seemed certain that they would "
"     'I had forgotten that,' said Jomer. 'It is  hard to be sure of anything "
hauled by 
""
flews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There  was trouble away 
sulkily.  'No safe  places. But  master must try it or  go home.  . No other  
eyes were wide open  - for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a 
"tall, unbroken by the storm,  the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped  "
"####-green  and  yellow);  wear  no  shoes,  because  their  feet  grow  natural  leathery  soles "
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1462. 
"ever come to lose it, if  he  was so strong, and it was so precious to him?' "
"curiosity  and  hope;  for legendary  gold  (mysteriously obtained,  if  not  "
shouted Pippin. 'Where's the water?' 
"Granthem Dikles,4041378096614,22-09-1998
"
"walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet  over  which  only a tall  "
"hope  of  a  midsummer  morning,  they'  had  spoken  gaily  of  the  passage  of  the "
Bilbo  found  sitting  on  the  doorstep  lonesome  and  wearisome-there was  not  a 
gesture of  warning;  in each  right  hand there  was an axe; upon each head 
heard in the Shire before.' 
sticking  in their backs. Beyond lay many  more shapes;  some singly as they 
Saruman. 
tongue Khazad-dym; and they  declared that now at last  we had the power and 
"into the West, refusing the call. "
"little  hill, while the  world  shook under them, and  gasped, and rivers of "
"pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. ""No secrets between "
"     Out of the  wreck rose the Black  Rider, tall and threatening, towering "
"crossing  the  river,  and  marching  up  the  valley.  They  bore  with  them  the  green "
sniff  danger ahead which  you walk  right  into; and if  they  run to  save 
"For  strange though it  may seem,  it was safe to declare this to me. It may "
it to the ground. 
"he felt or thought that  night, though it remained in  his  memory as one of "
"under him and he was flung aside, striking his head against the stony  floor, "
"     '  ""I'll give you Sharkey, you dirty thieving ruffians!"" says  she, and "
drawn across the recess.  
"Alverta Feuell,4017953026073224,19-08-1988
"
"     'I did so  ere I rode from the Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I  deemed "
"     the cow jumped over the Moon, "
"more  than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf, he prepared to take the upward "
"was  done,  they  all  mounted  once  more,  and  jogged  along  again  on  the  path "
"Giacinta Osanne,4041377635933,26-08-1982
"
"study on these matters for naught. You have  doomed yourselves, and you "
     'Then who would  you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who 
"     'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'we  shall all need the endurance of  Dwarves. But "
"Errick Stritton,4041595656604,27-08-2000
"
"Imladris, said Legolas and with  this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the Lord "
the falls of Rauros.' 
"####-     'Your rope might prove useful again, Sam.' he said. "
"Bellina Rapson,4041378318075,08-03-1990
"
"corner some of  the young Tooks and  Brandybucks, supposing Uncle  Bilbo  to "
'but  we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all. Things unforeseen may 
the lower  one  they were  dumbfounded; but  as soon as they saw how  things 
"we were only a legend to them, a secret in the heart of the forest. Yet here "
was hunting or spying on the ores of the mines. 
have it. And that maybe an encouraging thought.' 
"stood gazing for a moment. stock -still, gaping.  A boat was sliding down the "
"made to run  from the fair  Tower of the Sun to the tall  Tower of the Moon,  "
 
"of your dragon-gold - when you have got it."" "
     Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended. For in the 
whether alive or dead still remains to be seen. 
     'We found none but Orcs.' 
"good  to spend are soon told about, and not much to listen to; while things that are "
"But presently they heard a voice calling hoom-hom, hoom-hom;  and there "
"upon the  horse's back. Aragor n lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf's arms,  "
 
Celeborn  warn  us  against  your forest?  He  told us  not to  risk getting 
until  it almost ceased. They tramped on again.  But they had not  gone more 
"Kassandra Docket,4041371552269761,19-04-1996
"
"our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.' "
"     'I  think,' answered Strider  slowly, as  if he was not quite sure,  'I "
"yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their "
"they  lay  and  shivered  though  it  was  warm  and  stuffy,  until  dawn  came  pale "
Bilbo  wondered  what  the  dwarves  were  feeling  and  whether  a  lot  of  water  was 
""
     'Now I must go down to meet those  who come. I have seen  a  sight upon 
     It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway in this 
     `Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord 
that runs  down from Fangorn to join  the  Great  River. That  is  the north 
rolled out the song to greet them. 
was Saruman. It  is said  that he went away ere  nightfall towards Isengard. 
doubt was in his eyes. 
"this here,' he said. 'We think you had  best come now with us. It is not our "
"tree  in flower,  sometimes like a white  daffadowndilly,  small and  slender  "
"     'All  that you say  is strange,  Aragorn.' he said. 'Yet you speak  the "
the hobbits fell altogether short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria. 
it  went  up  in  rockets  of  glittering  sparks  and  vanished.  They  were  lost  in  a 
That horn the eldest son of our house has borne for many generations; and it  
through below. There was a dead silence outside. 
"least,  remember my  warning:  beware  of this guide,  Smjagol.  He has done "
     balin son of fundin 
padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel. Since we  took  
"beeswax candles. All the time they ate, Beorn in his deep rolling voice told tales of "
them not to be afraid  - but to mind their own business.  
""
"Ashleigh Spellman,4041594069389182,29-09-1980
"
"lore, as well as in  the ways of the wild. 'Who was Gil-galad?' asked Merry; "
Not at Home 
"battle. But I have not died, and battle still goes on.' "
perfectly miserable places. 
"from the  wall, panting like  a  hunted  animal.  Faint and seemingly remote "
body away. 
long it will be before  we really are  caught  and all the  toiling and  the 
"in  which  his  only hope lay, he  would not  use  it  to  help him kill the "
stately dark-leaved trees laden with scarlet blossom. Behind them they could  
"perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been  done. But he "
"Ebenezer Beadon,4041590713921,01-05-1988
"
robbing.  After  that the  ruffians turned nastier. And they  keep  a pretty 
but  I  was wrong. I saw  what it was like at last.  It was staggering. They 
"has  been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who otherwise might have met "
outside upon the coverlet. 
in complete silence and darkness. 
"there an armourer brought out to her a  small  helm, and a round shield, and "
"without my consent,' he said. `I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or a  "
"Faramir, remained  there, stiffened, staring  out with starting eyes. Pippin "
"     Thus it  came to pass that  when the  king set out, before Dernhelm sat "
it were well that you should learn  the truth  ere you speak of it  again  -- 
"So curse as  they would,  their prey moved slowly but steadily away. It was a most "
"     'Not for long now,' said Gandalf. 'The Third Age  was my age. I was the "
"Janos Mulgrew,4017954383063,25-06-1986
"
"Joellen Blampy,4041595432691,08-06-2001
"
"do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? ' "
"a few plans,' he said; 'and we have  all had  some much-needed  rest. Now we "
"by the open  window of the  study. A bright fire was on the hearth,  but the "
"'Goodbye,  my dear Bilbo  - until our next meeting!' he said softly and went "
     It  seemed  to  grow  larger  as  it  lay  for  a  moment  on  his  big 
"openly. Dare you think of what they might now be  suffering, or what Saruman "
"Bidget Rens,4041599883790,13-08-1999
"
"they  used  fresh  horses  from the posts, as is their wont. They  could not "
"aware of us for a long while. They heard  my  voice across the Nimrodel, and "
"and no wizard's pupil. He would have remembered his father's need, and would "
all  folk  that  we  met which way the Entwives had gone. Some said they had 
you  one  piece  of  advice  for  your  good:  don't  have more  to  do with  dwarves  than 
"     'We're keeping nicely, thank you,' said Mrs. Cotton.  'Or should be, if "
"drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear, or to imagine  that he heard, "
things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them. But 
was well filled. 
     Gollum  rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the  lip of  the hollow. 
"he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock -wall was a circle of "
Moon  rode  slowly  above  the  mists of  Anduin  and flickered through  the 
     'Very  well.  It is no good saying any  more.  Stick to your plan  - your 
the  elvish  sword  that  had  been  taken  from  Thorin  in  captivity.  It  is  said  in  songs 
"long road through Rohan on foot,' said Gimli. "
"fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.' "
Let us go down.' 
     'I do not doubt the valour of  your  people. But the world is changing. 
"glittering; on the left and  east the Great River  rolled its broad  waters, "
"prisoners, and had been busy pinching them to see which was the juiciest to eat. It "
"precipice, before it ducked and disappeared. "
uplands.  
 
"companies.  He  remembered his  vision from afar upon Amon Hen,  so few "
"forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate until tomorrow morning!"" "
"breath coming in great gasps,  and Gollum at his feet, resting  on his knees "
"Vern Alldred,4017957899123,03-09-1997
"
"Mandel Shirt,4041598815618422,09-09-1975
"
"Cicely Haresign,4041592122081713,08-04-1978
"
"     `But not  yet, I beg, Master!' said Bilbo. `Already the Sun is climbing "
"reached Isengard by now,  bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which  "
"'and  they felled  trees for the fire, as can be seen.  Yet they passed  the "
for the rest of  their  lives. Tom called  them one by  one and they climbed 
"for  many  years,  but  Gandalf  had,  and  he  knew  how  evil  and  danger  had  grown "
"     'We will wait,' said Aragorn. 'I  am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or "
"'He knows not to what end he rides; yet if he knew, he still would go on.' "
     The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark pass 
     A king he was on carven throne 
woods. 
reappeared round the bend far behind him and came labouring up the slope. 
     That night they camped  on a small eyot close to  the western bank. Sam 
"     `At first I  feared,  as Saruman  no doubt intended,  that Radagast had "
were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong.  His shield was 
"and Frodo;  and no one else  in the  Shire knew of its  existence,  or so he "
     'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?' asked Thjoden. 
breaking. 
     'Easy  it  is  now to guess how quickly the roving  eye of Saruman  was 
ending  of  the Third  Age of  the world into the  new  age it preserved the 
####-no reason for it. 
We knew there were funny things going on.' 
light came in his eyes.  
####-the gear that  I have  prepared  fur  you.' They  went out  together.  'This 
holding their breath. There stood  the trolls: three large  trolls.  One was 
shadow of Mirkwood. As they went away Bilbo could have sworn that a thing like 
"him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we "
"it,  if  we get  a  chance. Something  hit me, didn't  it?  And I fell  into "
"     `But the Precious holds the promise,' the voice of Smjagol objected. "
     'In  the South  the  realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while  its 
     Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when  he  heard Gandalf reject the  
"them both. Gollum  began to scream, a thin, tearing sound, very  horrible to "
"disquieted,  for it seemed  plain  to them  that old Barliman was putting  a  "
eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he looks towards Minas 
 
Underhill?'  he asked.  'Frightening  my customers and breaking up my crocks 
"But there was nothing, nothing at all; and none of them Were fit to go and look "
"out of the house on the  left. They opened the  further gate, and some  came "
have done away with it.' 
come. The inheritance  is mine  alone.  I don't think I  ought  even to take 
"going any  further today, so if you'll kindly escort me to The Floating Log, "
"things of  border -war that  now seemed useless  and  petty,  shorn of  their "
"to numbskulls!  You're nowt  but a ninnyhammer, Sam Gamgee: that's  what "
"Lemar Morrow,4715360866676,14-12-1993
"
last  battle at Fornost with the Witch -lord of Angmar they  sent some bowmen 
"standing, gazing ahead into the night. "
""
"with  us. Indeed  he  must,  for if he  does not forget his new  duties more "
"boughs, and far cries, and a rumour of  wordless  voices, murmuring angrily.  "
"Sibel Cadman,4017952918934295,26-02-1981
"
"walls of  Mordor slept, and  dark  things crept back to  Gorgoroth. And on a  "
"Men.  They were  Aragorn;  and Boromir, who said  that he came out of  Minas "
"Wood-elves,  sometimes with  the  king  at  their  head, would  from  time  to  time  ride "
"looked  for  it, and  your  fate to help me whom you long  pursued with evil "
"Precious goes we'll die, yes, die into the  dust.' He clawed up the ashes of "
little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.' 
"     Aragorn  had  brought  torches from Dunharrow,  and  now he went  ahead "
"the forgotten wain-road long ago had run down,  back into the main horse -way "
""
of which just showed the ground before  his feet; in his right he  held  his 
"line of mail-clad men. swift, shining, fell and fair to look upon. "
"Cherice Timperley,4473054351999,13-01-1999
"
your heart up! You may  come  through  all  right. There  is news brewing  that  even 
"     Still far away, forty  miles  at least,  they  saw Mount Doom, its feet "
turned to Gollum. 
"and two tall men, neither young nor old So much alike were they, the  sons of "
Riders of Rohan yet should come. Meanwhile they must man the walls and 
at what was going on. There was  a great shadowy  wood of Huorns at the head 
"put away, for  it  was contrived by the Enemy and works  his  will. You have "
which 
""
up there.' He waved his skinny arm  towards  the darkling mountains. `And we 
"     He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled "
scarf. He  had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows  that stuck  out beyond 
the trees above them many voices were murmuring and singing. They 
before her while his companions slept. 
sang: 
"or  one alone.  If  you  would let me choose,  then  I should  appoint three "
dotage; and her part seemed to her more ignoble  than that  of the  staff he 
"they sought. They went slowly in single file: Gollum, Sam, Frodo. "
"Elrond,' said Strider. "
the South. For that guard  they chose mostly archers  who knew  the ways  of 
""
"dread and danger. No  sooner had he come in sight of Mount Doom, burning "
     'I see that there  is some great tale of dread in  this.' said  Faramir 
"Alexina Falkinder,4666833673065604,22-07-1992
"
"on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly "
"these old images here  brought it to my mind.' Standing  up,  with his hands "
"sides again, up on to  new hill -tops and down into new valleys. There was no "
"debate the matter, and Sam did not tell  him that he had drunk the last drop "
see in the frowning stone. 
"been, and  the  arid moors  of the  Noman-lands, more loathsome  far was the "
stood in anxious thought. 
"into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command. Doom, "
"And we shall have  need of all folk of courtesy, be they great  or small, in "
"     to pass, and tarry never more "
"glimmer of his sword, or  could feel with his hand on the wall. Of these he took no "
"     'What do you mean?' said  Frodo, looking  at him anxiously. 'Just this, "
some air.' 
"you  against any peril; but if you keep it and see your  home again at last, "
     'Alas!' said  Frodo. 'That was indeed Boromir as I  knew  him. For  the 
"new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I fear that "
"step with a bump into the hall, and they sat huddled just where he had left them at "
"     `He came and laid his long hand on my arm.  ""And why not, Gandalf? "" he "
cast his gaze upon Barad-dyr. Then he was caught! 
Bilbo took a knife in a leather sheath. It would have made only a tiny pocket-knife 
"of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last amazed  by an old "
"Judy Element,4017959706557,09-11-1975
"
"do. I will not do this  deed. The Ring is mine!' And suddenly, as he set  it "
"Rea Cullimore,4041594174989,31-03-1995
"
in his  hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it  shone and glittered in the 
"and  soon  they  were  riding off  into  the  mist,  which  seemed  to  open "
"Rozele Faulkes,4113605834090773,29-04-1990
"
""
into that dark place.' 
from Bree. 
"Burglar  wants  a  good  job,  plenty  of  Excitement  and  reasonable  Reward,  that's "
"sixty miles from it,  I should think. I guess that we have gone about twelve "
 
"plain heaved and  cracked, and Orodruin reeled. Fire belched from its   riven "
"went to Mordor, and  there all  that  he knew was forced from him. Thus  the  "
then another; then again two more. 
"stranger, hungry and weary.  The stairs  were  high  and  steep and winding.  "
getting home as we have.' 
""
other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out  of his talk was Old 
"     'He had a  friend  called Djagol, of similar sort, sharper -eyed but not "
"     Folco went  home  aft er lunch,  but Pippin remained behind.  Frodo  was "
does not look eastward?'  he said. 'That  can be  amended.  In  this I  will 
"     `The log's  all right,' said Frodo.  `There are  many in the River. But "
"Are  we not both members of  a high  and  ancient order, most  excellent  in "
Halbarad.  'Little do they  know of  our long  labour  for the safekeeping of 
"all our hearts will be gladdened, and our hope be the brighter.' "
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in  their hair. Suddenly 
"below,  some  were  roving  about  the  mountain-side. All day Bilbo  sat gloomily  in "
     'Who is  the  master  of  Minas  Tirith?' the  man  answered. 'The Lord 
"Dedie Kelling,4252857475233,25-05-1993
"
"""Come!"" called Gandalf.  ""There  is yet  time  for council. Let Dain  son of Nain "
never! Alive after all – 1 am glad! I began to wonder if even your luck would see 
the song was ended he arose and cried: 
the room was close and still. At last when Faramir spoke of his parting with  
""
archway they were brought to a stand. To move an inch further was a pain and 
"Barnaby Hamstead,4041593398112349,09-04-1978
"
"     `I see that you do not yet know  what to do,' said Celeborn. `It is not "
"     'I shall  get  myself a bit  into  training,  too,' he said, looking at "
"With  that  he  put  on  Bilbo  a  small  coat  of mail,  wrought  for  some  young  elf-"
"Leave the halls and caverns deep, "
Shadowfax shall show her the meaning of haste.' 
now by the Enemy?  
"Inga Bockin,4041592532105,21-06-1986
"
"further, and his limbs gave way, he stopped and laid his master gently down.  "
"your ears cut  off. But we are the fighters. We'll feast  on horseflesh yet, "
men. 
"and  glittering caves, and white towers and  golden halls, and  battles, and "
"ages and ages before, when he lived with his grandmother in a hole in a bank by a "
     Then  Merry heard of all sounds in that  hour the  strangest. It seemed 
"more than a couple of feet high,  covered  deep in dried grass  and bracken. "
"weapontake. Now having eaten he made ready to set out  again, and  he wished "
'Does that settle the score between  us?' he said. 'Settle it!' cried Gimli. 
to attribute to the dragon-alluding to him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod 
"     We come, we come with horn and drum: ta -ryna ryna ryna rom! "
"and Sam's own country, and they found out  now that they cared about it  more "
"limb-lithe, and many can talk to me. Elves began it, of course, waking trees "
thousand spears I might  have sent  riding over  the plain to the dismay  of 
"Corilla Lindeboom,4646259026728,03-11-1999
"
sparks. He came back and laid himself on the bed again and was silent. 
came suddenly  the shape of a  flying deer.  It charged  into  the dwarves and bowled 
a sighing  echo. He could not catch  what was said .  The  walls seemed to be 
"ground,  and  stood  gazing  out  with  dazzled  eyes.  They  were  come  to  the  Front "
the  Enemy  can't  let  others  do  their  bit  in  their  own  way  without 
least.' 
"They did not care tuppence about the butterflies, and were only made more angry "
"Emyle Tresvina,4368223564092852,09-11-1995
"
"beyond  to  dwell in,  between  the river and  the Far Downs.  All  that was "
have just about  enough strength left to find  some hole  away up there. And  
"not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards his goal. "
and said that soon he and his company must go on towards the Mountain. 
long way  up before we get there. And there's still the tunnel. I think  you  
"Herrick Van de Castele,4041373310970912,22-12-1995
"
"     ' ""Good-day to you!"" I says,  going  out to him. ""This  lane don't lead "
wore  a  great horn tipped with  silver that now was laid upon his knees. He 
     So  it was that amid a  gathering gloom the King of the Mark made ready 
"his  stirrups, and raised up his hand.  Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his "
"     'Well yes  - and no. Now it comes to it, I don't like parting with it at "
""
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive 
 
     The only  real official  in the Shire  at  this date  was the Mayor  of 
"couple of weeks at a pinch. But if there's a drop left in my bottle, there's "
"Tilda Fellnee,4681312320394098,21-09-1996
"
feel more like eating and drinking!' 
if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.' 
does not grow in the bare hills;  but in the thickets away south of the Road 
and to your liking? Though  I fear that the board is barer in this city than 
"way to Rivendell, as best we can ' "
"####-fellow, your nice little Boss. Didn't you, Worm? Stabbed him in his sleep, I "
feet in the  shallow  stony stream. He seemed greatly  delighted to feel the 
"hunt  and  the  white  deer  that  had  appeared  upon  their  path,  they  would  have "
service. 
"these  two rivals  with other vision. A crouching shape, scarcely  more than "
     'But that  can only mean going  into  the  Old  Forest!'  said Fredegar 
"shield that had  been given  to Gimli, and  it bore on  it the device of the "
Shrivel and scorch! A fizzling torch 
"he  heard Sam's voice calling softly from  below:  Elbereth, Elbereth . Frodo "
"gained with  them  to  shape  his  raw  gold  and  silver,  and  had  afterwards  refused  to "
servant or emissary.  Yet it is  not our part to master all the tides of the 
"I think, but  they are ripening. We shall be hard put to  it.  We  should be "
"had  any  virtues, but  that it is  called westmansweed by  the vulgar,  and "
""
"and his mouth  slavered, and shapeless  sounds of fury came  strangling from "
""
"clad in green  and  brown,  Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil,  "
all.  And he  doesn't  hold with folk moving about; so if they  will or they 
####-the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves.  
"were  hard  and fell, and yet tears were  on  her cheek. A sword was in  her  "
or make mischief for amusement.' 
"Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty,  and the sight "
apart from that a great weight of dread  was on him. Waiting was unbearable. 
Far over the misty mountains cold 
clinking  and glancing on the stones. Some  found  a  mark.  The  assault on  
suppose we had better do so.' 
"     'I  have thirty  with me,' said Halbarad. 'That is  all  of our kindred "
fence. When they  came  to  Bill Ferny's house they saw that the hedge there 
     `Then lead on! ' said Boromir. `But it is perilous.' 
"""Sorry!  I  don't  want  any  adventures,  thank  you.  Not  today.  Good  morning! "
End; 
     'And these same foul creatures were more than  surprised to meet us  out 
than a year since you set out.' 
""
"     'Do you  think,'  asked Pippin hesitatingly,  'do you  think we may  be "
####-my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It is against our 
"and  remoter cousins to the ninth degree,  if  you encourage them with undue "
Mindolluin's  precipice  where stood the mansions of the dead Kings  and  of 
and deeds. 'I must find Gandalf at once.' 
"twice, yet I have spoken  to stouthearted  men, and I do not doubt that  the "
""
"light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even -star had come down to "
"Benedikt Pearson,4017953044518,05-03-1988
"
followed  him  towards the great arch. The  hobbits  now  noticed that as he 
"peaceful, and sleepy. "
"so  many  times,  that  at  last  he  grunted  ""pray  don't  mention  it,""  and  stopped "
     That morning they lit a fire in a deep  hollow shrouded by great bushes 
"Libby Scarman,4017958543415,22-05-1991
"
"his house. As soon as his  back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in  "
The  barricade was  scattered as if  by  a thunderbolt. Aragorn  ran to  the 
"the ground below. There was a ring of  metal. The sounds died  slowly  away, "
blinding flash. Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills. For a 
"foreboding  of some danger, still hidden  from  me but  drawing  near. There "
"trees  ahead,  and they knew that they had come back  to the Road after many "
"their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the "
"Tracey Garioch,4041598437870393,04-01-1981
"
"Onfre Pottle,4017959456955,20-11-1982
"
     O Queen beyond the Western Seas! 
on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will 
away.  You have had  neither  sleep nor food. A  guest -house  shall be  made  
"these trees grew and grew, till the  shadow of each  was like a  green hall, "
####-life.  It was a  tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for which the 
"Jan Leist,4017954935985136,02-04-1999
"
"is near the hour that we set for our going, lord,' he said. 'Shall I bid men "
present;  but the Sackville-Bagginses had already  departed in wrath.  Frodo 
to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark  would  hold an  assembly  of all that 
""
ram.' Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea. 
""
"     The  hobbit relaxed  and  fell  back,  clinging  to  the wizard's hand. "
"Loy Hess,4041374860484,16-12-1993
"
"'and Sharkey's going to do it; and make it hard, if you drive him to it. You  "
the  east side of the  knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that 
get. For the old man died in that hour  and fell upon his face; and no other  
""
"assault, nor wrath,  nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet had any  fly "
     is Water Hot that smokes and steams. 
"of fine diamonds!"" "
"so startling  wa s the  change that he saw  in  him, as if in one  night many "
     Ted Sandyman spat over the wall: 'Garn!' he said. 'You can't touch  me.  
"     'Ah! This  lot  won't stay to  talk, they'll kill, if they  can,'  said "
"""Yes, please!"" they all said together. ""Thank you very much!"" "
"my tail a thunderbolt, my wings a hurricane, and my breath death!"" "
more from the forgotten men who  housed in  the  shadow  of the hills in the 
"trickled  far  above out of  the round pool, now grown  to  a swift torrent, "
"anxiously, and he took his hand.  'Come, Mr.  Frodo!' he said. 'I've got one "
""
"a very bad place, and had not yet escaped at all. All  the same he was not going to "
"wains  could be slowly hauled; but no  enemy could come that way, except out "
     Sam unclasped his grey cloak and cast it about Frodo's  shoulders. Then 
"peace, I guess; but if you don't want the fun to begin right now, keep  your "
long  grim slopes of the Ephel D®ath clambered up. The weather of  the world 
"knees, his arms  hanging wearily  to the ground where  his hands lay  feebly  "
"torrent fell, splashing over many terraces, and then,  pouring down  a steep "
""
"Marney Villaret,4017957122852597,01-04-1981
"
     Far over wood and mountain tall. 
"     They went two or three miles further, and  the orc-hold was hidden from "
fingers.  
"(they had made the paths themselves), and were madly angry; so that do what they "
"night past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the "
"say,' he answered. 'If  what you tell me  is  truth,  then doubtless Thjoden "
"     The second part is called THE TWO TOWERS, since the events recounted "
"Wiatt Jendricke,4041379397312878,19-01-1976
"
"Cari Spackman,4041592209274,10-02-1994
"
"waters rolling many stones. Dimly  Frodo saw the river below him  rise,  and "
"can't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.' "
led them to a ford where the shallow  waters murmured  loudly on the stones. 
"Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but  never aga in will they listen to "
"Cassie St Pierre,4206384103650,04-07-1995
"
asked Frodo. 
"oath, and they would not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years. "
"their  hearts,  too,  and  they  muttered  that  they  wished  things  had  fallen  out "
"he fell into a  vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking  out of a high "
""
his senses. Goodness knows what the striking of matches and the smell of tobacco 
and 
"gollum!"" "
     Again  he  lifted Frodo  and drew  his  hands down to  his  own breast. 
     'Not for Him! ' 
Chapter 7. Homeward Bound 
deserted and in its ruins shadows walked. 
me that the Orcs had  bound them;  he  did not think that they were  dead. I 
"     The fires below  awoke in  anger,  the  red  light  blazed, and all the "
"children,  and no window was blind nor any courtyard  empty;  and after  the "
view. They had  trudged for more than an hour  when they heard a sound  that 
deemed them.' 
"Eachelle Bockmaster,4224266922303,04-10-2001
"
"     The  three  were  soon  busy  with  their meal;  and the  two  hobbits, "
"thrust down from the North. The Dark Power was deep in  thought, and the Eye "
"     Sam  muttered  something  inaudible. 'It's  out of  his  own  head,  of "
""
"companions, and he has been brave and faithful.' "
"Bondon Kornacki,4178338205933932,14-02-1988
"
     'Nazgyl!' he cried.  'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The  
"     'This is our way,' said Gandalf. 'Grievous is the fall of your men; but "
"this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. He did not forget "
     'In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields the 
listened. All his mind was given to listening and  nothing else for two slow 
"sword,  which  was  now  glowing  faintly  again,  then  very  cautiously  he  followed. "
were  pointed towards the strangers; and some  of the  horsemen had bows  in 
"arrows. That  Gollum isn't dead, for one thing. I don't like to think of you  "
"     We come, we come with roll of drum: ta -runda runda runda rom! "
"Aristotle Merriton,4656893627476,18-12-1996
"
the event has proved.' 
is not our custom to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here 
"Tabina Strettle,4041370515970242,05-01-1997
"
"     'Hope on then!' laughed Denethor. 'Do  I not know thee, Mithrandir? Thy  "
That  night  they  ate  their  very  last  scraps  and  crumbs  of  food;  and  next 
suddenly  felt  he would  go without  bed  and  breakfast  to  be  thought  fierce. As  for 
""
"honour of the lands about, as his sires had of old, then he will give also somewhat "
""
"close-fitting mesh of  horny  scales, or maybe  that was their hideous hide; "
"among  the Isengarders. One  of them, just  in front of Pippin, stumbled and  "
"####-     Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor! "
Party Field a beautiful young sapling leaped up: it had silver bark and long 
"orc, if  he could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a  "
"way to the king. Hirgon the rider of Gondor  was there before him, and beside "
wi th  the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in our land. I  
that they had never thought at all about what would happen after the treasure had 
"bright sky dazzled  him,  and he toppled over, lying where  he fell upon the "
"hundred horse there  should be,  among which should ride the sons  of Elrond "
"quiet, out of sight and out of mind, in a very dark corner for a long while. "
"inquisitive  among the inhabitants, large and  small, of the four  villages;  "
"elves speak of in the king's cellars. It was not built on the shore, though there were "
Ugl®k dashed off to stop a stampede. 
"to  enter that  land  secretly, then it  was also  a  last  unsleeping guard "
     He longed by her to dance and sing 
to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired to go  first to Minas 
"     `Maybe,' said Boromir.  'But always I have let my  horn cry  at setting "
"him, reluctant  to speak, and yet knowing that the word now lay with him:  he "
"Ailina Cavell,4041375711116,11-01-1996
"
"""They're hiding in the bushes with sacks,"" said he. "
"Allayne Athey,4041375160990510,26-01-1987
"
fourteenth day of  March in the  Shire-reckoning. And  even now  Aragorn was 
"     Sorrowfully  they  cast loose  the funeral  boat:  there  Boromir  lay, "
"Jowyn's hand; and they embraced him, and so they parted for that time. "
shadow of Gandalf's beard wagged against the wall. 
"####-son of Jomund, speak.' "
"     'That  is so,' said Wormtongue; 'but there is a  third kind: pickers of "
concerned Gandalf;  and  most  interested of  all  in Saruman's  doings. The 
guessed to be the one in which the path lay; but they never found out if they were 
"This song appeared to please Thorin, and he smiled again and grew merry; and "
"     'You seem to  have been doing well, Master Took,' said Merry.  'You will "
 
""
"death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart,  as you have heard, "
"Alex Smeal,4041375597282861,16-09-1995
"
But  what  could even a Ranger see except a confused  trail of orc-feet? His 
"us, of Lorien, and  Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And there s no time to "
watching him.' 
air again!' 
"Stonewain  Valley  yonder,'  he waved his hand southwards;  'but  narrow  at "
the inhabitants of the Marish  down by the Brandywine.  The  Hobbits of that 
"of  squibs,  crackers,  backarappers,   sparklers,  torches,  dwarf-candles,  "
"seemed. and beautiful: white-walled,  many-towered, proud  and fair upon its "
"our going,  save the Lady Jowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There "
I  think you  have had  it quite long  enough. You won't need it  any  more. 
Before long they found themselves in  a throng going towards the Great Gate. 
"Germayne Klosterman,4017953957123,15-05-1979
"
"     To Frodo's great joy the hobbits  stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed "
""
"Aragorn was  leading them at  a great  pace,  and  after a while they lagged "
"Dead.  When they were lost  to view, she turned,  stumbling  as  one that is "
""
were  glowing:  it  was now  mid-afternoon.  As they  went south the fume of 
for  it  was  wrought  of  pure  silver  to  the  power  and  strength  of  triple  steel.  But 
shows you up. Nice sensible hobbits stay with Smjagol. Orcs and nasty things 
"to him. 'This is my last  word,' he said in a low voice. 'The Ring-bearer is "
"talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to do, and maybe a journey "
that  the errand  should not fail.  And you are the last of all the Company. 
"####-or fortune  allows. The number must be  few, since your hope is in speed and "
"mountains. Further south  there are no passes, till one comes to the Gap  of "
"faced,  whose  friends  had  accused  him  of  prophesying  floods  and  poisoned  fish, "
march leading a company of the  Men  of the City:  he could not  rejoin  the 
     and light upon her banners laid. 
"Ari Mattschas,4017951176032321,21-05-1978
"
removed 
"know the right fashion  of Men's words  for such a  lord,  better than Ents.  "
"Catherine Saltsberger,4301495346502,14-03-1990
"
"outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces "
"     He  opened his eyes and  looked up as they came in. 'Hullo, hullo!'  he "
"my  Lord gone? I have just come on duty, but I  heard that he passed towards "
"     Thjoden smiled.  'Nay,  my son, for  so I will call you, speak  not the "
"####-'For one thing it would  take a long while: my name is growing all the time, "
"     `It is  of  great  worth,' said  Faramir.  'And  now, do you  take this "
and blessed and all its fear pass away!' 
others that dwelt in the wide  world had voices so  fair  to hear. But there 
"cold.  They  were  suddenly  aware of great  hunger,  for they had not eaten "
####- 
"     With golden roof and silver floor, "
"####-     Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead, "
"them lies our  brief hope, for in one thing only is  the enemy  still poorly "
"himself. When  he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the "
Host 
"in the treasury, and the lust of it was heavy on him. Though he had hunted chiefly "
 
"     A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet! "
"of the River. The light of  Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than "
persuaded you  to  forbid Jomer to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Jomer had not  
     On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky; 
""
####-keeping step with their feet  and beating time  with  their hands upon their 
"and I am afraid. I don't know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind the "
"     'Such  counsels  will make the  Enemy's victory  certain  indeed,' said "
Then he departed and went back to the camp. 
for the most part men from the fields and dales of Westfold. 
     Thjoden smiled.  'Rather  than  that  I  would  bear  you  with  me  on 
joined it to them could not be seen. All alone it rose and looked across the marshes 
Go on!  ' 
"     'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins. "
"####-     ` ""Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!  "" said I. ""It's  the "
"     'Ah! So that's how you had news of us, is it?' "
"language unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were "
""
had  great  difficulty  in  making  him  believe  their  tale  of  all  the  many  adventures 
all your subtleties you have not all wisdom.  Counsels may be found that are 
hobbits! Smjagol has promised.  He will  starve. He can't eat hobbits' food. 
"stood upon the hill-side, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over  the "
"herald  of  woe. Troubles follow you like crows,  and ever  the oftener  the "
"for breath. He saw as through a mist a  wide  flat circle, paved with mighty "
away  down  into  the  grey distance. There far  away there was a pale green 
and  he  from  of  old.  If  ever  you  came  from  the  forges  of  the  true  king  under  the 
fire-and he thought of plundering dragons settling on his quiet Hill and kindling it 
and  an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good  will to Elves; but you ask much. This 
describe his first impression of them. 
"more's the  pity. He could go on telling me as  long as he'd got breath,  if "
hide from Orcs.' He sprang  lightly up from the ground  and  caught a branch 
for? Do you miss the East Wind?' 
"""Indeed  I  will,""  said  Thorin,  and  he  fastened  it  upon  a  fine  chain  that  hung "
Legolas. Arod was his  name.  But Legolas asked them to take  off saddle and 
####-Book I  
     Anborn  went out  and Gollum went cringing before him.  The curtain was 
looked  out  of  the  window.  The  stars  were  out  in  a  dark  sky  above  the  trees.  He 
thrust outward by the northern cliff. There  upon its spur stood  high walls 
how this debate would turn in the end. He had hardly saved the Ring from the 
own.' 
he 
"the third  hour of the morning with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we "
clad in the black and silver of  the  Guard;  and he held  the door  against 
""
then you'll have some fair folk riding through.' 
"said,  and the other Ents all stopped their chant. 'You are a hasty folk,  I "
the light comes only down deep shafts.' 
 
"behind, until he came inside  the ring and could see all the floods that lay "
"     Bergil  clapped his hands,  and laughed with relief.  'All is well,' he "
"Bendick Blissitt,4041377392089,16-12-1981
"
"     The air was very still, and the dell  was dark, and the Elf-lady beside "
"     'I would that he had  escaped,'  said Thjoden. 'He was a mighty man. In "
"bade  Shadowfax return to his stable. 'For, my friend,' he said, 'you and  I "
"a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff. "
""
"     Turning aside, she led them  toward  the southern slopes of the hill of "
"comes out  of  the Wild, and I  never heard no good  of such  folk. He knows "
and they were led from the cave of Henneth Annyn. After they  had passed the 
     'What a  foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo  wildly. 'Why  did  we ever  
"rush  at the  ring, trying  to burst out back towards Hobbiton.  He aimed  a  "
"Ashly Gain,4041595775156,19-05-1975
"
"     `It's no  good worrying about him now,'  said  Frodo. `We couldn't have "
"yet. No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this region, for even in their "
     Then Frodo  came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore  it to 
"gloom. It  was  not difficult,  for  the  rift was at this  point only  some "
was  joined  to  the  main  water of  the Forest River  flowing down  in haste  from  the 
"Griffy Phillpotts,4041593912111173,24-10-1980
"
"your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand  now too well.  I keep  a  "
"But there is something strange about you, Strider.' He bent his clear bright "
"     Men came to the  door crying for the Lord of the City. 'Nay, I will not "
"     'They pushed,  pulled,  tore,  shook,  and  hammered;  and  clang-bang, "
"Bald Slite,4041594871733,05-03-1980
"
hearing  a sudden terrible  call  out of the  Dark Tower; and  even  at that 
and  high  across  the  opening.  There  were  holes  in  the  wall  through  which  they 
"####-Shadowfax and the  other  horse,  they walked forward to the sentinel at the "
"of Frodo,  lying bound or  in pain or dead somewhere in this dreadful place.  "
"Well, as he is not  here, I hope he'll find an easier end. But now I must do "
"and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief,  "
"Bethany Crudge,4041594925232,25-12-1978
"
Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword  shall be reforged. I  will come 
"tight-drawn sallow skin. A wild light flamed in his eyes, but his malice was "
certain  even  of  the  direction  they  had  been  going  in  when  he  had  his  fall.  He 
"so. Yes, I stood beside him,  as he blew the  horn. But  no help  came. Only "
Many men learned the crafts of  the  Entwives and honoured them greatly; but 
"and even after that his speeches at banquets were limited to ""Thag you very buch."" "
"     'He won't be so eager when Mr. Frodo has finished with him,' said Sam. "
""
his elven-cloak all healed of  the soils and hurts that it had suffered; and 
"peeping from  under their cloaks, and the helms of Gondor and the Mark,  and "
"else out of  them. But  in  the end, when Bilbo actually began  to stamp  in  the  floor, "
And 
"Ringwraiths  were  scattered,  and  have been obliged to return as best they "
for many days  to  come. And there is nothing more that I can do to help it. 
"     No apparent  change came over the ring. After a  while  Gandalf got up, "
     Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as his guide 
"Great River.' Sam blushed,  but he looked gratefully at Frodo,  for  Rosie's "
Arathorn  was going to war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was  that 
     `So you have been there?  ' Frodo insisted. `And you're being drawn back  
"about them, and  in the air  above. Far away up  on the hill they could hear "
"Cordie De Zuani,4041374060884394,07-01-1999
"
'Hullo!' he said. 'Anything wrong? What's the time?' 
"     'But if you want to  beat  the Old Took,' said Pippin, 'I don't see why "
"about all  these charming, absurd, helpless  hobbits. It would be a grievous "
great  hinges and  iron bars were  wrenched and bent; many  of their timbers 
"what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.' "
"     'By Elbereth  and L®thien  the Fair,' said Frodo  with  a last  effort, "
"Roanna Leworthy,4017957139491587,18-02-1977
"
"Mountains, out of which the stream came.  And he thought suddenly: ""It would "
"person,  Mr.  Baggins,  and  I  am  very  fond  of  you;  but  you  are  only  quite  a  little "
####-only remembers his own name  because people  shout  it at him  all day? They 
"     'Yea,' he  said; 'for though  the Stones  be lost, they say,  still the "
"Jareb Redmire,4414445466654372,28-06-1984
"
     'The four hobbits shall c limb up here  and  stay with us-we do not fear 
     'All right! What's the harm in my  telling you  what  I should like:  a  
"was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was on him. `I got it all  "
"one  way:  to  find  the  Cracks  of Doom in  the  depths  of Orodruin,  the "
     'Behold  Eorl the Young!'  said Aragorn. 'Thus he rode out of the North 
"     'They won't get far,' said  Pippin. 'All that country is alive with our "
Dark Tower and openly declared  himself. Then for the  last time the Council 
"not used to footpads in this country, but we know how to deal with them.' "
"And there upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur, high above the plains "
could be seen. 
out  across  it. 'Let us  shut out the night!'  she said. 'For you are still 
"The riding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From "
""
"were  too  roomy,  and  as  they  climbed  in  the  dwarves  thought  anxiously  of  the "
"unexpected adventures.  They galloped their ponies  over  the last furlongs,  "
will ever come back across the River out of the Darkness?' 
"company,  grey distorted  figures in a mist, only  dreams of  fear with pale "
"blowing, if your reckoning is true, was  the day when we parted, when  I and  "
going back would at least seem credible. 
"found it quite as difficult to stick on as he had feared; but he managed it somehow, "
"     'There's some  mistake  somewhere,' said  Butterbur,  shaking his head. "
"me time!"" But all that came out with a sudden squeal was: "
""
"     'Put it on the ground, master, if you please! ' he said. 'Easier for me "
"Chandal Maurice,4041597738376,25-08-1995
"
"Georgiana Matisoff,4041591835631541,25-07-1999
"
     And with that  Gluin embarked on a long  account of the doings  of  the 
"     His knees shook,  and  he  was wroth  with himself.  'Here is  a  thing "
     He paused. 
were so excited that for a while they almost forgot  about eating. There were 
"now  climbing  towards  the South was  veiled  in the reeks  of Mordor,  and "
and with his little finger crush us like a fly that tries to sting him?' 
"Rab Cramer,4041377739354,14-05-1976
"
we 
"     Frodo  suddenly felt very foolish,  and found himself (as was his habit "
"Bilbo.  ""Is  that  the  person  you  are  taking  us  to  now?""  they  asked.  ""Couldn't  you "
that pierce  that  dreadful  King.  More  deadly  to  him  was  the name  of 
clear light for eyes to see that can.' 
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill;  for plainly some 
"give  them  their  pay.  If  the  elf-king had  a weakness  it was  for  treasure,  especially "
 
"     'All right,' growled Snaga.  `But I'll come and  have a look at you all "
now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.' 
"it were  in a black vapour wrought of veritable darkness itsel f that, as  it "
"since  he was free again, and he  a  Marshal of  the Mark,!  brought him his "
"Gandalf  bade us  hope still for his cure, and we had not the  heart to keep  "
"     `I know what it was that you  last saw,' she said; `for that is also in "
"intently.  All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt  a cold dread creeping "
"chair in the hall. It's time to  close the shop, Merry,'  he said. 'Lock the "
     They  stumbled  wildly  up the great stairs beyond  the  door.  Aragorn 
Goblets they carved there for themselves 
####-stand by you  when all  others have gone.  Do  not send your  faithful Grnma  
six meals  a  day (when  they  could  get them).  They  were  hospitable and 
"south-eastward. There Anduin, going in a  wide knee about the  hills of Emyn "
 
stones about  them. 'Come! We must get  back and see what we  can do to pile 
"     So it  went on,  until his forties were  running  out, and his fiftieth "
"Zorana Isherwood,4041375152130489,02-05-1991
"
####-way  from  the  skirts  of  Mirkwood  in  the  North  to  the  mountain-shadowed plains 
"nonsense,' said Sam. 'You used to like the inside of an inn better than  the "
"commonly  brown.  Thus,  the  only  craft  little  practised among them  was "
"Ettie Kidman,4017953387867,31-08-1977
"
unseen candles; here and there they twisted like ghostly sheets  unfurled by 
"Marcelline Morhall,4041376900098,05-07-1995
"
"became more  evil.  They met no enemies by day. At times  by night,  as they "
####-was taken away. There was the dear master of the sweet days in the Shire. 
 
"is not yet deserted, for there is a  secret power here  that holds evil from "
their joining with Rohan. 
"Cornelius Ferenczi,4041595793545023,13-12-1991
"
"also  disappeared  in the  night,  none  other than Bill Ferny's squint-eyed "
departed with Lotho and  the spare  key and  the promise that the  other key 
     'And will he provide breakfast?' 
"Sisile Ellyatt,4041373849728,29-12-1988
"
"more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you,  Frodo son of "
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.' 
"with water, some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set "
"you keep the key and guard it, until the City is set in order again.' "
"     Every  one  of  the various  parting  gifts  had  labels,  written  out "
part of it. He did not answer. 
come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!' But it 
"Deadmen's  Dike,  and  they  fear  to  tread there.  For the  folk of  Arnor  "
     `Then  you  will come to  Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir.  His eyes were 
"that the time was ripe, and that the  Stone had  come to me  for just such a  "
####-sorcerer. I don't advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by his dark 
"of the things he had said to the dragon, and was not eager to repeat them. The old "
night  in  wakefulness  and they were aware  of many things  half-seen  that 
the stone was found-wrapped in an old bundle of tattered oddments that he used as 
"     `Oh come! ' said Sam.  'We must rest for a bit, even if we get up again "
"     'Don't be  a  fool! What  have  you  heard,  and why  did you  listen?' "
"Giulietta Ascrofte,4041374829810,09-07-1995
"
"follow it, we  shall be bound to  come out on the  east side of  the  Forest "
"     'Then you've heard  more than I  can speak  to,' answered the Gaffer. I "
with  a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed 
"the ground beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like "
black sails bellying in the breeze. 
"the air, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and "
     They heard Gandalf go back down  the steps and thrust his staff against 
"Galadriel, so long  treasured, and  almost forgotten till  that hour.  As he "
can trust.' 
who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the  Encircling  Mountains 
should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead Frodo  
     And there are many paths to tread 
"yours is guarded after all,' he growled, turning to Gollum. 'As you knew all "
when you see it? Die  now and curse in vain!' And  with that he lifted  high 
with 
"reach  the  bundle.  'I'll never get  it back  now without  waking  him,' he "
     While Gimli and the two  younger hobbits kindled a  fire of brush-  and 
could look out on the morning over the world. 
"     Thus came Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elessar, Isildur's heir, out  of the "
"been of some service. Descendant of rats, indeed! Is this ail the service of you and "
"     'Alas!'  said Thjoden. 'Must we pass this way,  where the carrion-beasts "
"####-shivered as he threw down  their chieftain.  Out  swept  his sword,  and  he "
"realized, first that the pipe might  be in his pack but he had  no leaf, and "
Not so for Dwarves.  
"said; 'and bear his body in honour from the field, lest the battle ride over  "
"untie our legs first, or we'll do nothing, and say nothing.' "
"that  they  lost  their wits. Then Balin, who had grasped Bilbo's plan better  than  the "
"####-and brought no animal, least of  all  this one that Sam is fond of, if I had "
towards the East. 
"Dionis Sorensen,4041597102045,23-09-1994
"
"Kelby Hulland,4017950913110960,15-07-2000
"
""
"for him, then drat him, I say."" "
"to write, I only really like writing poetry. I wonder, Frodo my dear fellow,  "
"Beulah Springham,4017958694762,17-12-1989
"
many  lily-flowers  nodded their half-opened heads in the grass: deep  green 
"     'I  think I know already  what counsel you would  give, Boromir,'  said "
"the look of a  hobbit's foot, though it be all that can be seen under a heap "
"it was not  encouraged by  the  sound of Merry breathing softly, asleep in a  "
"####-companions:  Sam, who  could not  bear it otherwise; and  Gimli; and myself.  "
"circuit of the ruined  walls of Isengard.  But  Aragorn, Gimli,  and Legolas "
"days  ago, I heard the ill  news.  The tidings had gone  far  and wide  that "
miles  into the  forest:  the heads  of the  trees marched  down  the slopes 
"the branches groaned, the forest moaned, "
Gimli and went with him to the  Glittering Caves;  and when they returned he 
"     'Enter, good guests!'  she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was "
Lebennin with its five swift streams. There dwelt  a  hardy folk between the 
     `Exactly! And who are  they to be?  That seems to me  what this Council  
we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.' 
"alliance  with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say  I and "
"smite that foul Messenger with  it, then almost I should draw level with old "
"the foul craft of Saruman  has bred, they will not quail at the  sun,'  said "
     'Very well!' said Pippin. 'But don't forget the sniffing!' 
The daylight is dying! 
"Osbourn Abbay,4017953630439647,11-12-1982
"
there they found a path made  in ages  past that few now dared to tread. For  
"you are silent. I  can feel it.  There is no sound for miles about  us,  and "
"the  bells  rang  in  that  town."" He  looked  both  sad  and  grim  as  he  said  this: he had "
beyond thought  of weariness. He could not see anything  ahead. for this new 
"almost to the cliff's brink. The bottom of  the  gully, which  lay along the "
for  them  like a black and  frowning wall before  them. The  land began  to  slope up 
"     'We must stop  him,'  said Pippin.  `And  that is what  he  is worrying "
the shapes became  terribly clear. He was able to  see beneath  their  black  
stabbing-sword.  Sam  had brought  several  orc-helmets. One of  them fitted  
"strange monsters,  and  dark  caverns opened benea th them.  But Gandalf went "
bear it. My heart is glad  to know that you have  such a coat. Do not lay it 
line or two I cannot  read. Then comes We have taken the twentyfirst hall of 
"Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled  him from the sky. He filled us all "
I know that it was not. He is dead as he foresaw.' 
"Yulma Trenbey,4017950370684,08-02-1993
"
"doom  shall  stand for a  year and a day, and  then cease,  unless you shall "
"valleys,  and  then  the  goblins  and  the wolves would  have  to  fight  a  terrible  battle "
on the whole  they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous journey. But 
"     'For a nice bit, loo,' said some.  'At a bargain price,'  said  others,  "
magnified alarmingly; but  though every now and again Bilbo  in  fear  stopped and 
     'Less than an eye!' said Gimli. 'But  I will not go into  any orc-house 
"them,  and  a  horse  for Gandalf,  for  their  journey  to  the  forest,  and  he would  lade "
morning  when  they  woke  the  first  thing  they  noticed  was  that  they  were  still 
""
with Beregond and was made known  to  the  men of the  Third Company. And 
"of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold. "
"Dulce Oswick,4830446839686,18-01-1976
"
     So they ended. Then they  turned  their boat and drove it with all  the 
     'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!' cried Pippin. 
world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene country with floors 
Fire in which  it was made? That  is  the path of despair. Of folly I  would  
     There were rumours of  strange things happening in the  world  outside; 
"splinters  on  the  peaks,  and  rocks  shiver,  and  great  crashes  split  the  air  and  go "
"but you cannot reach them. Only  shapes  to see, perhaps, not  to  touch. No "
guessed both halves of the hobbit's mind. 
"     They turned  their  backs on  the doors of Orthanc, and  went down. The "
start.' 
     'I do not  know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw  him fighting on the ground 
"three halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling. "
"It comes first and follows after,  "
"others. Already  it had almost become a  throng. Some called  for ale, and some  for "
there. 
"but he was looking at Sauron's Road  from Barad-dyr to the Sammath Naur, the "
on to the  shadowy  horse  and  seemed  to  vanish  across the lane into the 
"with better heart;  for it seemed to them that the  Forest had relented, and "
year 
"Geno Overstreet,4017957397169727,07-08-1979
"
"and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was "
dwarf; and the dwarf was actually Balin. 
River. 
huddled together. 
"maybe, but doughty. "
"Ricard Glentworth,4041592275660412,19-01-1986
"
and  trouble  my  people  in  the  forest  and  '  rouse  the  spiders  with  your  riot  and 
And more  are  coming. There are others. I know their  number. I know  these 
"birds were  circling  about it, but no sign of  other living things could be "
"Rodolfo Beachamp,4114646319911645,02-01-1982
"
     'And the Lord Denethor what would he have done?' 
""
"Micki Enderby,4041593878650859,03-07-1985
"
"####-wall, as if he feared to handle them.  'No  man  will  touch them  I promise "
"line  of the Ephel D®ath, and then they saw a shape, moving at a great speed "
people.  We  crossed  over Anduin and came to  their  land:  but  we found a  
would not see a thing that is high and excellent cast away needlessly.' 
looked hard at  him.  Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final 
saw  to  his  surprise  that  what  from  a  distance  had  seemed  wide and 
door.' 
"courtyard.  Then  he  woke  up  when  everyone  else  was  asleep,  and  he  heard  the "
were aware of a great host gathered  all about the hill on which they stood; 
Sam held his  breath. Now more than half the line had gone by. Then suddenly 
was  discussing  plans  with  the  Great  Eagle  for  carrying  the  dwarves  and  himself 
"increased my sorrow, you two  strange wanderers from a  far country, bearing "
"     'Dangerous indeed, but not to all,' said Aragorn. 'There is one who may "
####-maybe he sees things that ain't there.' 
"left Dunharrow, and such a fear was  on all the folk that none would look on "
"Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to  tell me tales  like that, knowing  how I "
to 
gold. 
"     Far  within  he  could hear  faintly the voices of ores clamouring, but "
"bidding.  The  goblins  of  the  Misty  Mountains  were  now  few  and  terrified,  and "
"and among  them  were  broken swords and axe-heads,  and cloven  shields and "
"question: the one he most desired to have answered.  'Tell  us, Master,'  he "
"smelt by goblins, and fingered by goblins, and quarreled over by goblins. "
"     'We  can  cut  straighter than the road anyway,'  answered  Frodo. 'The "
"everything  in  the  forest  for miles,  at  last  they managed  to  gather  themselves  in  a "
"do you suppose, and why?  I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting  "
month  Farmer Cotton found Frodo lying on his bed; he was clutching  a white 
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred  the heavy inside shutters and drew the  
"repaid my trust; for  if Elrond had  not yielded to me, neither of you would "
"ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go "
believe me when I say that it was  not out of kindness: that's not  even one 
"Caz Herety,4041378977995,07-09-1997
"
hard choice. Will you not take mine? ' 
"     Men now raised the  king, and laying cloaks upon  spear -truncheons they "
"     By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! "
"     `I cannot,' said Merry. `I have never seen them.  I have never been out "
"Then  warning  trumpets  were  suddenly  sounded,  and  echoed  along  the  rocky "
"No  other mortal Men  could  have endured it, none but the  D®nedain  of the "
"becomes clear  and  smooth again,  though it runs  swiftly. Our hardest task  "
strength. 
tidings of the ancient dwellers in the mountains have our folk ever learned. 
going like fire all ways. The ruffians that were watching our land have fled 
heard filling  the woods with  horror in the Eastfarthing  far away.  It was 
Evendim fell  into ruin; and  the heirs  of Valandil  removed and  dwelt  at 
that fancy can wander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay  upon the  borders of 
"their foes,  and of  the charge of  Thjoden and  his knights, then  her eyes "
"Horten Newark,4041379673952918,29-01-1992
"
"     'We  will!'  said Merry  and  Pippin together,  and  they  turned  away "
"     Sam scratched his head. `No,  I can't think how, begging  your pardon,' "
 
"     'I thank  you  indeed,' said Gimli  greatly   pleased. 'I will gladly go "
Guard; 
     'Who lives  in this land?'  he asked.  'And  who built these  towers? Is 
"Down the hillside  the young Entwash,  leaping  from its springs  high above,  "
"Shana Clothier,4041373916337,12-03-1995
"
"Page Kenwright,4041377004904681,28-04-1978
"
different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point: 
"""Pardon me,"" he said, ""if I have overheard words that you were saying. I don't "
"Xever Luxford,4041374271658,16-08-1980
"
and heavily. The wind was thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy. 
it - but he must not get it.' 
"     Ere iron was found or tree was hewn, "
     Gandalf paused and set a few leaves  aside. 'There are several pages of 
leaf in the City.' 
"or more, blue  and purple stood the  White Mountains,  rising  into peaks of "
"till the  spring comes and  the  new green opens  do they fall, and then the "
"'Elen snla l®menn' omentielvo, a star shines on the hour of our meeting,' he "
"kindnesses,' said Frodo. "
forest.  
"Loree Sexton,4041599762424418,03-09-1997
"
"Ottilie Foskett,4041375285663547,25-02-1984
"
"     `Wake our guests,' he said, `and take them water. It is time to eat.' "
"go to this lords' council and learn what I  can. But the Enemy has the move, "
"Pippin! They were face  to face in a narrow lane,  and but for themselves it "
"in mind, or in some  cases already written, and  little or nothing in it was "
But  these  ordinary  aboveground  everyday  sort  of  riddles  were  tiring  for  him. 
     'Is it not guarded? ' Frodo repeated. 
he  marched to the  overthrow of  Barad-dyr. And then all the  clouds rolled 
"We must away, ere break of day,  "
"Sidney Joutapaitis,4041375123051145,12-12-2000
"
"     ' ""Then  you must go  now,"" said  Radagast; ""for I have  wasted time in "
Mountains.' 
caught by  Orcs and tell all he knows under threat of pain. He must be slain 
"     The cold hard lands, "
"the shadows where he lay, and had rolled down with a bump from the platform on "
"     'Yes,  we certainly must decide what to do  at once,' answered Strider, "
"and though it may in time to come be made clean,  no man may dwell there for  "
"Denice Golsworthy,4991738736996,16-02-1978
"
see the travellers start. The other  guests in  the inn were at the doors or  
"in  the  West,  under  a fire-flecked  sky. To  the left  lay darkness:  the "
there?  Frodo did not think  so. And here he was  a little halfling from the 
else.' 
Shire they  would have thought barely enough  to  keep them  on  their legs.  
"####-returned the glance, less in height and girth than most. He caught the glint "
"     They  now drew  lots for the watches, and the lot for  the first  watch "
some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is  your name? Whence do 
"Dwarf, or an Orc, or even  an Elf. Think of the riddles they both  knew, for  "
     'G®thwinl!' cried Jomer. 'G®thwinl for the Mark!' 
spoke quite politely. 
"     Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife  with notched  blade  that "
"They were all singing with harsh voices, and laughing, making a hideous din. "
"Lynsey Houseley,4483108118963,03-03-2000
"
the  bottom of which  there was  a bowl -shaped dell with grassy sides. There 
'and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All's well; aye very well 
"     The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the "
"trumpets sang, and men cried with many voices and in many tongues:  "
"Clyde Geane,4744159741332925,09-01-1987
"
"Charity Coll,4017955540781836,09-04-1979
"
"Haldir. 'It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet still "
"Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood. But none could  rival her, Shelob the "
"Harland Brinsden,4017958729477,03-01-1975
"
"crumbling  cliffs, and  chimneys of  grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and "
"walked there, but I will bring no report to darken the light of day. In that "
"Balin  and Fili  and Kili,  and with  them went Bilbo. They marched under  the grey "
beside him dead. The mountains had not crumbled  nor  the earth fallen  into 
thought him.  Not Gollum  himself  could have twisted  more quickly  or more 
dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their  deeds.  for 
It'll be better than many places I have seen.' 
"Gabrielle Josifovitz,4041592178594,15-04-2001
"
"the fair fields of Rohan, and even in this Hold among the hills  there shall "
"of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in  the  house of Elrond,  after his  deadly "
""
dare great risks  at  need. That may be it. He may have used  the  Stone and 
"his voice: unlike they were, and yet also much akin. "
"claims,' he said, 'but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a  "
"son of Jomund, and  beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. He had  no helm, "
shore  against  the  oncoming  winter;  and  also  under  the  Master's  direction  they 
"calling: 'Death! Ride, ride to ruin and the world's ending!' "
"tree-tops in  winter, though the wind tonight is  in the  South; but we have "
"     'I  think  we  will not  speak  of it,  at least not  yet,' said  Frodo "
every step more painful and he gasped for breath. 
"Whitby Arnould,4746179790586922,17-10-1979
"
"     'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running home "
 
of a keyhole was there left on the inside. They were shut in the Mountain! 
the morning. 
"     They wished  him  farewell  and  rode  away,  and  passed  through  the "
"uproar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I came "
"to the aid of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record "
     It was  already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds 
with them shut. No one was anywhere near him. Just imagine his fright! He could 
"Shelagh Caldaro,4919605606562,26-02-1996
"
shook  his  head;  for  if  he  did  not  altogether  approve  of  dwarves  and  their  love  of 
"used it  to  find  out secrets, and  he  put  his  knowledge to crooked  and "
token.' 
"climbed on the bench  and tried  to  peer out of a window,  but it was  like "
"Tobye Harbison,4041594216624507,13-10-1977
"
"longer than other  men,  yet that is but a little while;  and when those who "
torches away south in Dale before them. 
     For a moment Jomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was 
     'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo. 
garden. Sam disappeared. 
"umbrella, that she was quite touched, and drove away in tears. She had never "
"of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that  is "
"     'Yes, yes, and Sam stinks! ' answered Gollum. `Poor Smjagol  smells it, "
"and  up. Every now  and again it gave  a yell, and  the  echo  ran along the "
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left  
gone far  by field or road this day.  There will be hard handstrokes nigh at 
     At last an evening came when from the walls the pavilions could be seen 
As he  sang he  threw  some more  stones  and  stamped. Practically  all  the  spiders  in 
"Fabian Blyden,4041591252590303,10-11-1994
"
out  of  their  great  gate;  but  there was  the  dragon waiting  for  them. None  escaped 
"     'I  found  him,  sir,'  put in Nob.  'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with  a  "
"made,  especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the "
"little hurt from the evil,  and escaped  in  the  end, because he began  his "
"""Follow me  then,""  said  the  captain,  and with  six men  about  them he  led  them "
"Beltran Grayson,4041590657680,08-02-1997
"
     `Orcs! '  he muttered. `We'll never rush  it  like  this.  There's Orcs 
"'The trouble is  that there are so  few of us left,' he said turning towards "
"of the wood, and to  the south  of  them, out of a deep  fold cutting  right "
"Sherye Flewin,4447504173305917,05-07-1992
"
"about it. Personally I have no hopes at all, and wish I was safe back at home."" "
"like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to "
     It was  not long  before Gandalf himself  came  in  search  of them. He 
     A  wide  and  echoing  passage led  back  from  the  door  towards  the 
"Alley Wilse,4902170233442,14-10-1981
"
his onset grew ever slower. His numbers were too few. His flanks were unguarded. 
"Staci Thorrington,4017955556634,24-03-1976
"
here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored?  
his own strength. But his wisdom failed; and I fear that as the peril of his 
passed into a long angry speech in his own tongue that slowly died away into 
"Blaire Sauter,4976744918631727,20-06-1975
"
"     'No,  we won't,'  said Frodo. `But we won't  let you go, either. You're "
"     'And  it  is also  said,'  answered  Frodo:  'Go not  to the  Elves for "
"     'Quickly?' said Treebeard. 'Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected. "
"""I don't understand,"" said Thorin, and Bilbo felt he would have liked to say the "
morning is passing.' 
"dangerous yourself,  in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is "
"     Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far.  Soon the thought of "
"chanced there, for nothing could be seen.  And others, as ever, looked north "
     'Good  heavens!'  said Frodo. 'I thought  I had been  both  careful and 
"     Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, what "
crack of a whip. 
a great  gift. There  is none like  to Shadowfax. In him  one of  the mighty 
     He lifted  up  the hobbit. 'Cling to  my back! I shall need my arms' he 
"Madelaine Trustram,4041597168504833,05-05-1980
"
"But Pippin rose to his  feet, as if a great weight had been lifted from him; "
or of a hedge that had once lined the  road  across the drowned valley.  But 
"wilderness of boulders  and  rough stones, wet  and slippery with the  heavy  "
####-woods nearly ended in disaster.' 
help the master.' 
Argonath  to the  Sea.  And now that part of the tale that  I shall tell  is 
"Won't you stop, "
     'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and  meet you  
"Deane Pattle,4041377241674,12-05-1977
"
"their feet for a  while,  and then  set down again. Always  the noise of the "
across her with desperate strength. 
The  next  day  he  had  almost  forgotten  about  Gandalf  He  did  not  remember 
"the holes,  and there was a dense fog. We took refuge in that guardroom over "
"The  path had veered away from the main pass in the great ravine, and it now "
first met any offer  of battle.  For a strong force  of Orcs and Easterlings 
"went. But Sam turned to Bywater,  and so came back up  the Hill,  as day was "
"     `Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.' "
know us. We must get off this road somehow.' 
into Northerland.  A  long and wearisome  journey.  Four  hundred  leagues I 
"the  light  of  the westering  sun which  slanted  into  it,  and  fell  golden  on  the  garden "
"edge  of  the  glade. He was  quite  hidden  in  its  boughs,  but  you  could  see  his  eyes "
"about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land. "
"""Where  did  you  go  to,  if  I  may  ask?""  said  Thorin  to  Gandalf  as  they  rode "
"and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred, "
"Coming  to  a  rise  he  could  see  his  own  Hill  in  the  distance,  and  he  stopped "
"Marthena Krause,4465459981010968,18-02-1984
"
And I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw you.' 
"""The key!"" shouted Bilbo. ""The key that went with the map! Try it now while "
"anyway, to know what I  do with my own things? It is my own. I found  it. It  "
"""Are we all here?"" said he, handing his sword back to Thorin with a bow. ""Let "
"     Those days,  the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long past, and  the "
"luck held, and for the rest of that day they  met no living or moving thing; "
outwardly unchanged;  and  there were lights behind the red curtains  in the 
fast closed. Upon the battlement nothing could be seen. All was  silent  but 
"Shara Davydochkin,4976042738709611,01-04-1978
"
broader. As Merry entered he was speaking to the king. 
Farewell!' 
"     'It is a hill,  just to the north of the Road, about half way from here "
""
"and 1418, he had used all the sources  available to  him  in Rivendell, both "
     Hardly  twenty  paces  from where the  hobbits  lurked  the  small  orc 
at the sun. 
"to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great affairs.' "
"Not very good perhaps, but then you must remember that he had to make it up "
crown that  flickered with  a  perilous  light.  Now he was drawing near the 
he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head.  `But you're in the 
####-Bridge on which the Road crosses.' 
"upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious passage thr ough the woods; and "
rate both alive and unthrottled. 
"     Then world behind and home ahead, "
Laid low their towers and houses frail. 
 
"the strangers, and, maybe,  the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at "
"Indira Malloy,4041591047718003,01-11-1982
"
"deeper  and  deeper into  the  wood, never  far  from  the  stream, climbing "
"and  then they stood a moment with heads bowed  in  grief,  for it seemed to "
"     Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded! "
to  him  his  own  great  chair  and  set  Fili  and  Kili  beside  him  in  places  of  honour.  
was a  glitter  of eyes under his long  lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily. 
"was  a  dead  silence,  until  suddenly, after  several deep breaths,  every "
lawn before the pavilion.  and  the fountain rose and fell glittering in the 
would m the confusion  and treacheries of the  time have found in Mordor the 
####-and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and 
"the guest who has escaped from the roof,  will think  twice  before he comes "
"their  flight or followed them.  They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch "
"Shandeigh Konmann,4041371315557,25-06-1986
"
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.' 
"     Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house,  looking out upon a  "
made shift to bear him away towards the City; and others lifted Jowyn gently 
of his own stopped several minutes and sniffed. 
"     Gollum squealed, and squirmed, and clutched at Frodo, when they came to "
"strong wooden doors, and left him. They gave him food and drink, plenty of both, "
I'm off!' 
"dwarves, wizards, and all such folk as ever passed that way; but he was no longer "
     O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! 
"     I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice. "
"unless it were far away  westward, where the furthest groping fingers of the "
"legs, not to mention their language, which was not drawing-room fashion at all, at "
"enough, and were getting dangerous. A great heaviness  was in all his limbs,  "
     Of  Bilbo's  later adventures little  more need be said here. Wi th  the 
"fair  was Eorl the Young,  who rode  down out  of the  North; and there were "
"flowed up into many valleys still  dim and  dark, untouched  by the light of "
it no harm. ' 
"at last. I was right,  you see.  We  are high up on the east  side of Moria. "
"his Deputy, until Mr. Whitfoot was  in shape again. The  only  thing that he "
"glad to be still alive, while behind them outside they heard the roar and rumble of "
"council. Not far off now is the Front Gate."" "
"am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that "
"beneath them. The  great rumbling noise, louder than ever before, rolled  in "
the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing and trees that do not 
every little is a gain.' 
"further than Good Morning; and if  Treebeard  was to call the roll, how many "
"until at last it was rolled back, and a  far green country opened before him "
though  they  knew  his  worth  and  courage.  He  was  a  descendant  in  long  line  of 
thought  that  nothing dangerous  or dreadful  had happened;  and indeed the 
privately made up his mind to leave on his  fiftieth birthday:  Bilbo's  one 
"Chadwick Blenkinship,4017955139118143,19-03-1997
"
he could not piece the words together. At times some Rider would lift up his 
weapontake at  Edoras. A  thousand spears  had indeed already ridden away at 
Shirriff-house at the far end of the village. I'll take you there. ' 
"Ingunna Coenraets,4017950181313,30-11-1976
"
"     her sails he wove of silver fair, "
right when we pass the wall.  And  Grimbold shall lead his towards the left. 
"     'Yess,  wretched we are,  precious,' he whined. 'Misery misery! Hobbits "
"reckon back our line  to  Mardil,  the good steward, who ruled in the king's "
"     'No, he  will try to  trap  the fly  and take the sting,' said Gandalf. "
"     'I  do not know,' answered Gandalf. `But I found myself suddenly  faced "
Middle-earth;  all other powers  were here  subdued. Fearfully he took a few 
"one stage further. They did not know the time, nor how long  they had slept;  "
     The two hobbits  gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even from 
terror slept.  But had  I known that the Dwarves had st irred up this evil in 
 
barring  the  entrance  to  the gorge.  Beneath  it by a  wide  culvert  the 
Altogether there were about two  dozen standing on the wide grassy  floor of 
"Alvinia Shireff,4852781221023,09-04-1990
"
 Foreword  
an  hour of blank despair. Four days had passed since they had  escaped from 
"Charmian Dyos,4041597595503,28-02-1982
"
"Jemie Lillywhite,4041593590469885,25-06-1977
"
impenetrable shadows; and there  they  heard the  creaking  and  groaning of  
"could not be seen:  it was like a grea t shadow, in the middle of which was a  "
"tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may "
     `What would they have done  to me?' asked Frodo. `What  were the Riders 
"Aretha Ducaen,4041377755601320,06-04-1999
"
in  the  middle  of  the  hunting  and  spinning  insects  Bilbo  plucked  up  his  courage 
"     'The wind is north from the snows,' said Aragorn. "
 
"will give  you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter for  "
from  Lurien. Then he  sprang ashore  and climbed  a few paces up  the bank. 
"miles away, if they are still alive.' He shivered. "
"they shouted;  and  they  danced round him. Merry and  Pippin  began a song, "
fell off that narrow place into the deep shadows on either side. He was feeling very 
date that Sam noted. 
"     'But  when I escaped and  warned you, then the mask was torn, for those "
"things,  lots  of nasty things. No birds,' he ended sadly. Sam looked at him "
world.' 
"####-about, and what the king means to do. For I must go where he goes now.' "
of Moria.' 
"     Dizzy and very  tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up the last  "
great steeds of the  King  of  Rohan?  Maybe  the Rohirrim will come soon to 
     Upon the grass untroubling. 
"Lazaro Figg,4041372548706627,25-10-1990
"
"which Beregond held  shut  with  his left  hand was wrenched open, and there "
"hill They decided to make for the top at once,  while the daylight was broad "
*
of the world outside since you came to this land;  and those years lie heavy 
"Scott Leuchars,4041591037216778,10-05-1997
"
Forest  was hidden  under a fog. It was  like looking down  on to  a sloping 
""
"whitened the foam at our prows. And so it was, as  you know, that we came in "
"broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like a rough crown "
"     'Nay, lord,' said Aragorn. 'There is no rest yet for the weary. The men "
"we  did,  when  in Rivendell they told us the tale of Beren One-hand and the "
"about  it;  they had come back too quick. ""It isn't all that big, and it does not go far "
"seeming to notice, but soon his head too nodded to the table, and he fell asleep and "
"     'Well, what did you discover?' growled the voice of Ugl®k. "
""
"least, and  a  lot more than  that  from down below, I guess. How many can I "
"Yancey Hughlin,4041594934622,01-12-1979
"
"     'Now we'll deal with  Grishnbkh,'  said Ugl®k; but some even of his own "
"head, and saying at last:  "
he remembered no more. 
stirred in  the  mounds.  Barrow-wights walked in  the hollow places  with a  
the  north  and  east ; they were roaming  about and  doing a great  deal  of 
bowed. 
"stamped,  until  nearly  all  the  flames were  put  out-but  they did not put out  the  fire "
"     'You may be right,'  said Gandalf; 'but this snake  had still one tooth "
"Allina Warman,4041593190374,06-08-1996
"
ever know. There will be  no one  I can  tell. It will be in vain.' Overcome 
sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues lolling out. 
midst of the  Forest to join the  Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to 
The counter -spell was  terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the door  
beasts.' 
"may  not have noticed, but some of the waves  took the  form of  great white "
"De witt Bredgeland,4804755950517,19-11-1994
"
"the Nazgyl, under  the  archway that no  enemy ever yet had  passed, and all  "
"curious. I was  professionally interested in  your ring, you may say;  and I "
"before they could catch him; and before they could get him out again, Fili and Kili "
"     'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very  cheerless and uninviting it "
head;  their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was 
""
The great door had creaked and slammed. Beorn was gone. The dwarves were 
"on  the  East  side  of  these  truly  hospitable  mountains,""  said  Thorin,  not  quite "
"Sharon Ibbett,4041596907329,28-03-2000
"
"and  overhung that  it proved  impossible  to climb out  of it again, either  "
"and sat beside him withou t speaking, but the face of the Lord was grey, more "
me more than many tidings that might seem worse to  learn that Sauron levies 
passed. 
     In the  dead hours Frodo came out  of a  deep dark  sleep  to find  Sam 
"Adelheid Dermot,4041596950491464,20-01-2000
"
     The  pursuers  brought  their  steeds  to  a sudden  stand.  A  silence 
"     'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever it "
told  you before. Probably  a  permanent holiday:  I  don't expect  I  shall 
"far away. I looked  on it and saw that, whereas it  had once been  green and "
"think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman. "
beyond.  
the huge backs of the mymakil with war-towers  upon them. But  northward the 
     At last Frodo was  convinced that  he really was  in pain; but it could 
to find.' 
beyond 
"     At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still  and silent as a  "
     Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving 
would have him. 
"     At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless  of the darts  of "
"round before the luck turns."" "
when Middle-earth was young. Behind  them in long swift lines came all their 
"hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt.  ""For Sauron  knows,"" "
a very broad belt --I should  have said  no more than a mile at the widest  - 
hard.  'Speak!' he said. 
"     Daur a Berhael, Conin en Annyn! Eglerio! "
"the one hill he  stood with Gandalf, and there fair and desperate was raised "
"from the pass, a power that wished now to have a clear light in  which things "
"and vanish out of the silly  situation. It seemed to him,  somehow, as if me "
"doors  she turned and looked back. Grave  and thoughtful  was her glance, as "
trench delved that could be crossed only by a single bridge. 
"     Then Jowyn rose  up. 'Come now,  Meriadoc!' she said. 'I will show  you  "
from Amroth's haven west over water.' 
"Stearn Scoffham,4209425873216,29-06-1979
"
"top  of  the slope. Sam thought that he heard cries and wild  shouting also, "
together  in a corner  to escape  the draught:  there seemed  to be a steady 
lore among the D®nedain.' 
"     'This country wants waking up and setting to rights,' said the ruffian, "
"of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren "
"trees lengthened,  he  ended. 'Praise them  with  great praise!' he said and "
of the  heavy  air foreboded storm.  Suddenly  the  clouds were  seared by a  
they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they  were descended  from folk who lived 
To stay would be jolly 
"     As  soon  as  the  daylight  was  full, they had some hurried food  and "
"even  as  I lay on the ground in sleep, and they troubled my dreams:  hor ses "
     that tarried in Arvernien; 
"the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt extremely hungry. "
"     and your King hath passed through, "
"with  us; and we ought to take plenty  to spare; for we  may be delayed,  or  "
folk  should  have been inside Udyn before yesterday evening. You know that. 
"they'll  find it for  themselves.  They've a  right  to live,  same as other "
"the dark mountains and go to see Him very quick.  Back a little, and round a  "
####-gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night. 
"his mouth  and  called  to  them. They  heard  his  voice  come  faintly:  ""Good-bye! Be "
""
other end.' 
"     'Then  we must  go on, if there is a way,' said  Frodo with a sigh. Sam "
"This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little "
"     'You have  been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of "
About them  the turf  was  burned to the roots and all within the  ring  the 
"have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo! ' "
"land, fair-seeming  still, was nonetheless now territory of  the Enemy. They "
near to matters that were better not debated openly  before many men. It was 
warbling of little hidden  birds. They  had to pick their  way  carefully to 
"""Quick! Quick!"" he gasped. ""The door! The tunnel! It's no good here."" "
from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.' 
doubtful look at Strider and  a  shake of his  head. His footsteps retreated 
"as nice a young hobbit  as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, "
least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!  
""
"Maxine Pexton,4295112792884,03-11-1992
"
felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.  
"     To  some there  Bilbo's tale was  wholly  new, and they  listened  with "
and none can foretell the time in which it will awake. Remember this. For if 
"     All  went well that day, and no sight  or sound had  they  of the enemy "
last with a struggle he got up again. To his amazement he found that Sam was 
Mountains  loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A  long grey road 
"'He's spotted us! It's all  up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is "
"the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before them. "
""
perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!' 
round  a  sharp  turn. They  came  to  a low  room  with a  sloping  roof (a 
that the Captains of the West came at last  to challenge the  Black Gate and 
"falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and water -plants,  and  "
"point, Frodo did not forget the wiles  of the  Enemy. The 'escape' may  have  "
"     'And how will you learn  that,  Master Dwarf?'  said  Gandalf. 'Saruman "
     Now Faramir's voice  sank  to  a whisper. 'But  this much  I learned or  
and no ponies to ride; and you don't know where you are. Now I can tell you that. 
"Cale Varnals,4041590730461038,02-03-1981
"
"block it up. They will guard it doubly after this,"" he laughed. "
"sky, and  longed for  the feel of wind on  their faces. There was no movement of air "
"     'Weeks indeed,' said Pippin. 'And then Frodo will have  to be locked up "
listening  stones. Pippin cowered down  with his hands pressed to his  ears;  
"sapphire and amethyst, all kindled with an unconsuming fire. "
"     'Yes, I  am with  you, Master,' said Sam, laying  Frodo's  wounded hand "
"enough; he was  t ired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin,  and felt that he "
before  the  spiders were disgusted and came back  to  their  trees where  the dwarves 
Flies and Spiders 
"preceded them,  but being somewhat  bolder  and more adventurous, they  were "
 
"     `Hullo, Frodo my  lad!' said Bilbo.  `So  you have got here at  last. I "
news alters them much for-the better. So far we have had no clear idea what to do. 
     'There in the trees.' 
"happened, I would rather not be on the other side.' "
more  ... up  from  east up  the Silverlode. The remainder of the page is so 
he  muttered.  `Is then the  doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then 
"wings  of storm.  Then Elendil the  Tall and  his  mighty sons,  Isildur and "
"important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought  it important, "
They knew  an  enemy.  Visible or  invisible none  could pass unheeded. They 
"shocked and sad, my dear Frodo.' "
"the Rings of Power,  and  their forging in the  Second Age of the world long "
back  and  put  themselves  and  all  their  families  for  generations  to  come  at  his 
"Natalya Guillot,4041371240126712,01-03-1998
"
"     'Excellent!' said Frodo,  when he understood the  plan. 'We  could  not  "
"begun, so I  will go on.  We  come  now  to the  very brink, where hope  and "
"crevices  and fissures blacker than  the night, where  forgotten winter s had "
"     'But  I rode to the foot of Orthanc,  and came to the stair  of Saruman "
"""No time for it,"" said the wizard. "
"clad in a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive one against another and "
"Rakel Postin,4041597749878,15-04-1992
"
if the White Lady comes.' 
"and that  was for Gondor; but Seven Stars were  about it,  and  a high crown "
came  out  from  behind  a  cloud  and  shone  bright  on  the  outside  of  the  door-but he 
"     'Also there is this!' said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed to "
"and  their  voices  faded  away. He was  in  the  dark  tunnel,  floating  in  icy water,  all "
"keenest huntsmen to seek  him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of "
not find  much shelter there.  Rills of water began  to run down;  soon they 
"     `We'll see, we'll see,'  he  said often to himself, when the evil  mood "
"     'Nay,  cousin! they are  not  boys,' said Ioreth to her  kinswoman from "
 
"     Suddenly Faramir  stirred, and he  opened  his eyes,  and he looked  on "
"     'Men of Gondor, the loremasters tell that it was the custom of old that "
"the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by some  impulse that he "
"their  packs; and they soon felt too hot, for  they  were  obliged to put on "
need to ask hereafter how comes its name: Blackroot men call it.' 
"Some things he has  seen, and  others I  have seen myself.  The Ring now has "
"her cunning. With  his  remaining  strength  Sam leaped and caught the  top,  "
     As master of Bag End Frodo felt  it his painful duty to say good-bye to 
"     'I see a great smoke,' said Legolas. 'What may that be?' "
     'A man  may love you  and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels' said 
small clumps of  trees that melted away in  the distance to a brown woodland 
     'Is it morning already? ' said Frodo yawning. 
will not slay thee  in thy turn. He  will  bear  thee away to the houses  of 
""
"other with gold, such as one strong pony could carry. ""That will be quite as much "
"so tough  that I  have  never met the like of it. Had  I known, I would have "
Stones.' Pippin stirred uneasily. 
a sudden wind; and it seemed to me that I awoke from a dream. 
more than likely  to be  lying in wait for  them upon the Road  itself. They 
"names.  The  Master  himself  was  turning  to  his  great  gilded  boat,  hoping  to  row "
"Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards "
many 
they  saw  Legolas  coming  back.  At  the  same time  Boromir  and  Aragorn 
cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the dark 
"Lady Jowyn, where is she?' "
"then only by your shadow, and that would be shaky and faint. "
"Edward Wainman,4041599978127912,26-10-1996
"
came down  on him. A large strong hand took him in the nape of the neck  and 
"took from him  the tokens: coat,  cloak, and sword. 'These we  will take  in "
"this hour  henceforth, until my  lord  release me, or death take me , or  the "
"could at a little distance.  At last, when  night  was growing old and  they "
     'But  we  will  speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will come. The 
"Tani Swann,4041595773381472,24-12-2001
"
we sent no drink. 
"the  right,  or  to  the  left,  the  shadowy  form  of  a  great  bear  prowling  along  in  the "
"Gleda Davinet,4017957586699054,06-01-1988
"
"queer voice,  and bent  down towards  me. I could not see any face,  for his "
"     'We could, if  our legs  would  do it,' said  Merry;  'and if  we could "
"     Frodo  thought for a moment,  fearing some further trap, and  wondering  "
""
"     'You have yourself already  taken it,' answered Gandalf.  'To put  your "
"Erek Drakeford,4041599684994621,27-10-1975
"
"old Ent  now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoulders again, and "
"     'Get up, you  idiot!' he shouted to the other  beggar, who had sat down "
"not clearly what  this thing was  when  I spoke, still I should  take  those "
"anger,  and he knew  it again  at once, harsh, brutal, cold. It was  Shagrat "
"     `I don't know.' answered Frodo. 'I thought I heard feet,  and I thought "
their height could not be guessed. 
"####-were left  up at Bag End,' said Cotton; 'but  the gang from Waymeet will  be "
"then softly, to his own  surprise, there at the vain end of his long journey "
"Francyne Rysom,4041370083156,23-11-1998
"
"whom  so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,  "
and he gave a queer look at the limp bundle that the men carried. `Got him?' 
them to be left all alone.' 
"Tam Dicker,4041594585705,26-05-1998
"
lake. 
     There shall be shown a token 
But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?' 
Chapter 10. The Choices of Master Samwise 
"####-many, were fair to see and strong, and most of them  had a rich golden  hair "
"face, kingly, lord of Men, dark-haired with eyes of grey. "
"notice,  except  to  hurry  past  for  fear  of  goblins  or  half-imagined  dark  things "
""
"Galadhrim,' he said. `Would it please you  to climb with me up Cerin Amroth?  "
"wall  enclosing a narrow court.  Its gate, upon the near south-eastern side, "
"otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple  they will be, "
infuriate them:  like stinging flies. But an  Ent  can  be  stuck as full of 
"enjoy again in time its peace and riches."" "
"he said. 'This isn't your country, and you're not wanted.' "
"waterside  and  up  the water  you  came with  out  a  doubt.  I  don't  know  your  smell, "
"     'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That  accident has made your "
forward and set himself before Faramir. 
"     'Where sight fails the earth may  bring us rumour,' said  Aragorn. 'The "
     There  was another crack  of  thunder;  and then  the  rain came.  In a  
beginning and at end.  Wild  Man could walk from here to Don between sunrise 
"Gandalf struck a blue  light on  the end of his magic staff, and  in  its firework glare "
his white  hair was  long and thick and fell  in great braids from beneath a  
"today."" "
"lying  below  you,  and  beyond  them,  high  in  the East,  the Lonely Mountain where "
"itself, it did. But where it had been to you know better than me. It was  as "
"hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will "
a second time.' 
"oath  that  they broke  was  to  fight  against Sauron, and they must  fight "
"freely, without fear of hurt or  fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo  found "
then I must rest a little.' 
"gleaming  white  was his robe;  the eyes under  his deep  brows were bright,  "
"     'Time is  pressing,'  said the  Rider, not  heeding  Aragorn. 'We  must  "
####-all see their horses?' 
"both together with that hungry villain nigh, promise or no  promise. Smjagol "
borders of this land.  Now tell us where he is; for  I much desired to speak 
need my company on the Road.' 
 
behind. All  they could do  was to  follow  the fold - downwards. The ground 
were missing. Some seemed to  have been burned down. The pleasant row of 
"     Shadowfax lifted up his head and neighed, so that the stable shook, and "
"     After doing some twelve miles, they halted. A short  way back the  road "
"this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc."" "
"called that before,' he said,  'but not by you.' "
     'So be it!' said Thjoden. 
"gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I  was  not "
"old life lay behind  in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched "
"Bertie Willmett,4298310543117,31-08-1992
"
rope.' 
"     He walked away, and  the hobbits made a lane for him to pass; but their "
"Bring us to  the Gate,  and you  may  go where you wish  --  only not to our "
     they all went back to bed! 
thanks and good-nights. 
"with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills  of stone, and the silver  "
"""What message?"" said poor Mr. Baggins all in a fluster.  "
"and he fell with a cry. Bill  the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned "
Do you not remember how eagerly  he urged  that no man should be spared on 
he was 
"Elysha Bedboro,4017955087636674,26-10-1999
"
head to miss the fringe of the man's brown tunic. 
"hear the  sound of falling water, and a stream  ran down before them between "
"We go straight west  from here, and down the stair.  From  there straight to "
path  would  have  led  them  down  the  stream  from  the  mountains  that  joined  the 
"and what his servants are doing. For do not forget, Peregrin Took, that  you  "
""
"more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it  "
"     Gandalf caressed him. 'It is a  long way from Rivendell, my friend,' he "
"with a cruel thong cunningly  handled. If they halted or stumbled, they were "
"many long  leagues before any  move is  made. So cheer  up, Frodo! You  will "
were undoubtedly richer. Not that Belladonna Took ever had any adventures after 
with a soft green like young grass: early spring or  a fleeting vision of it 
"a present threat, there was a tiny tongue of flame. "
he was trembling. Drawing his eyes  down from the tower and the horns of the 
sad waters  of Lake  N®rnen; nor of  the great roads that ran away  east and 
"hope is to rule in my stead, to stand behind every throne,  north, south, or  "
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the orcs.  
Through the mist that riseth white 
"that leaped upward, and smote the high black roof. Then Sam saw  that he was "
doors. In front of him lights sprang out in  the gloaming; dogs barked; feet 
"     'Ah! The Ring! '  said Boromir, his eyes lighting. 'The Ring! Is it not "
"Nay, rather I think that I now begin to understand a matter that has puzzled "
away!' 
to the bank. 
     'Where shall we go?' asked Merry. 
"the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned with sharp "
"a little Gimli looked back, the company of Jomer were  already small and far "
"thing to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom."" "
was the original  boundary of  the land  eastwards. He built (and excavated)  
""
"####-and high lonely cries of  strange birds.  As they journeyed the sun mounted,  "
others. Early in the morning the  Council had been summoned.  There  all the 
on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our way out yet.' 
was about them. 
"response, not even a catch in Gollum's breathing. "
"west, and joined  its  bubbling water with the hurrying Silverlode. Together  "
"himself. 'They are falling rather  behind  the world in  there, I guess,' he "
"     'Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,' said Sam. "
"flowers,  the ways of trees, and the strange creatures  of the Forest, about "
Mountain.  They  built  the merry  town  of  Dale  there  in  those  days.  Kings  used  to 
"Denice MacDunlevy,4721559289621,03-12-2001
"
He deserves death.' 
"####-Denethor  in his need, and  to us all, Mithrandir!' Ingold  cried.  'But you  "
"reward; for we are brethren. In happy hour did Eorl ride from the North, and "
say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that 
pipe  straight  through  each  one  of  Thorin's.  The  Gandalf's  smoke-ring  would  go 
"struggle, in any case,"" said Gandalf. "
"""Not very well,"" said Bilbo (as a matter of fact, he could make nothing of it at "
"but  I  think  I  am  right  in  believing""  (this  is  what  he  called  being  on  his  dignity) "
"""Nori at your service, Ori at . . ."" they began; but Beorn interrupted them. "
up from all the lands about them; and their hearts beat suddenly again. 
Running  River  came  down  from  the North. Only  its  high  peak  could  they  see  in 
the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the out-stretched shadow of the northmost  
There  was  a  mighty  pushing  of  poles.  The  elves  that  were  standing  in  the 
""
     They  had come to  the desolation that lay  before Mordor:  the lasting 
Suddenly  Bilbo  noticed  that  some  of  the  spiders  had  gathered  round  old 
"and  we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables "
"Garold Dodshun,4017959139122,29-05-1996
"
writing. 
which they could carry  both  their boats and their  baggage to the smoother  
the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered. 
     not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing 
"their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just  under the dappling  shadow of the "
"ledge,  till  the  wall  opened  and  they  turned  into  a  little  steep-walled  bay,  grassy-"
"But he did not tell Bilbo that there was one smell he could not make out at all, "
""
for the fragrance of its  flowers. From  that land it must have been carried 
the middle stream. 
"No knowing, no knowing "
"####-     'Let us hope that  he  did not pay  too dearly for his  boldness,' said "
"not  too  gently,  for  they  did  not  love  dwarves,  and  thought  he  was  an  enemy.  In "
"if  we  had  not arrived, you  would already have been keeping  one  another  "
"     'Fair  lady!'  said Frodo again after  a  while. 'Tell me, if my asking "
flet as such things were called in those days: the  Elves called it a talan. 
whom the race  of N®menor  ran   true. Men that  saw them  whispered  saying: 
"You  say the ring  is dangerous,  far mor e  dangerous than  I guess. In what "
"     `Yes, yes,  perhaps.  No safe places  in  this  country,'  said  Gollum "
"     `It's  a trap!' said Sam, and he  laid his hand upon  the  hilt  of his "
"unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.' "
not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who 
"""All  right!"" said Bilbo, not daring  to disagree, and nearly bursting his brain to "
over the fields of the Rohirrim. Let us search northwards!' 
tickled their fancy.  'Where's old Barley?' they  cried. 'He ought  to  hear 
"     The big orc, spear in hand, leapt after him. But the tracker, springing "
you know the pass-words of the  Seven  Gates and are free to go forward. But 
     nor sail she bore on silver mast: 
trees  (never  having  had  to  escape  from wolves  before).  So  you  can  imagine  how 
"Elf-friend, maybe, yet from such of his sons and people as went not over Sea "
"Janeczka Lynagh,4017953839560,28-06-1996
"
"     'Maybe I can,' said Gandalf;  'but  if  I do, then  others will die,  I "
"""The key! The key!"" cried Bilbo. ""Where is Thorin?"" "
"and was lost, and still he remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling "
####- 
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?' 
"     'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry. "
patrol  had  only been a part of his  garrison. Almost  certainly  they were 
     Chapter 4   Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit  
"     'Did you get any news, any information out of him?' "
     He led them down the passage to the parlour that they  had used on that 
deep rumbling shook the  air.  'Frodo!  Master!'  he  called. There  was  no 
"seemed that  they  heard, far away, a  long  wailing cry, high and  thin and "
"all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the Ring. But I did not "
####-     We must away ere break of day 
legends spring to life out of the grass.  
"blowing. Merry looked round:  he had forgotten  the war, and  all  the world "
rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat  in the breathless night-air. 
"Heindrick Torn,4041590658597,18-02-1979
"
about the dogs?' asked Frodo anxiously. 
"""I  went  on  to  spy  out  our  road.  It  will  soon  become  dangerous  and  difficult. "
teeth and poured some burning liquid down  his  throat: he felt a hot fierce 
the Seven Seeing  Stones was preserved. In  the days of his  wisdom Denethor  
"know  it,  O  yes,  then we'll  pay  Her back,  my precious. Then  we'll pay "
"that the Lord seemed to  know about a people that  lived far away, though it  "
"     'Yes,   lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a  horse,  passing "
Doors? I can't see any sign of them.' 
"commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there  are many birds and  beasts in "
     It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore: 
"harsh in the heavy air, braying ominously. "
"best for he was  sure-footed, and he walked  over quickly, holding only with "
"read, but not  far from the top a spring  crossed  the path, and in the  wet "
"     They had not made any definite plans, but  had vaguely thought of going  "
"""Where is our host, and where have you been all day yourself?"" they all cried. "
"within  him, still stung  by  the scorn  and suspicion in that  cold  voice. "
he nor Sauron have foreseen. 
"     The morning came after  the  day of battle, and it was fair with  light "
"would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine. "
"and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to "
"out. He was wrong. Thorin, of  course, was  really  the grandson of  the King under "
tonight from the peril that comes behind.' 
####-myself!' 
"point little more than half a mile in width. Flats and meads of rough grass,  "
"house of the dead  the voice of Denethor crying: 'Haste, haste! Do as I have "
pools among the roots of trees.  
clouds  came up out of the sea in the distant South and were blown away upon 
needed! I have other things to do. Do not be a fool. If you  wish  to  treat 
"above the water ,  and hid it as well  as  they could behind a great boulder. "
It  seemed  that  Bilbo  was  not  going  to  be  eaten  after  all.  The  wizard  and  the 
"The  first  grey light of day  was in the room, and  a  cold  air was coming "
"better. No ponies, and no food, and no knowing quite where we are, and hordes of "
"their chief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they "
great.' 
peaks of the Misty Mountains and the shadows were long in Beorn's garden. 
"keep going. The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind  the taller "
upon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten:  What  haw I got in my pocket? 
     he built a boat of timber felled 
"blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun. "
great effort of will he staggered up; and then he fell upon his knees again.  
that every  hobbit  in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present 
"     'What, just in time  to meet Bilbo?' said Frodo. 'Wouldn't an  Orc have "
"race, a sprinter's course and he would be through!  "
irresistibly all round  the  house  into a  dark shoreless pool. It  gurgled 
"deep breath. 'Why, what a dream I've had!' he muttered. 'I am glad to wake!' "
servants of the Enemy. Neither have we  done harm to the Elves. I am no more 
"     'It can't be  helped, Sam,' said  Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized "
"     Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as  he was about to set it by the "
'and that's more likely when Mistress Lobelia's  the  buyer.' (Otho had died 
and sable of Gondor gleamed on him as he rode forward. 
part trying to save the Precious from the Enemy. as long as he can. For that 
"make our counsels together  against  evil days, and repair our injuries with "
mouthfuls of lembas settled deep into the brown  fern and went to sleep. Sam 
"Catarina Salleir,4017952114252930,22-12-1998
"
mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not 
explored  all  the  confines  of  that  dark  realm? '  He  looked long  and 
can. 
Then  they  knew  that  Gandalf  was  going  to  leave  them  at  the  very  edge  of 
"     'Ho la! You up  there, you dunghill rat! Stop your  squeaking,  or I'll "
Captains rode  forth towards the Black Gate with  a great  guard of horsemen 
his steed.  It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again.  For he 
"light of it now, wavering and blowing like a  noisome exhalation of decay, a  "
""
as best he could. He pushed his way through the tangled twigs with many a slap in 
"Allys Kempstone,4310554864982,25-08-1992
"
tunnels  and  caves  the  goblins  have  made  for  themselves  there  are  other  things 
of his mind are hidden from me.' 
"were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin),  and Merry Brandybuck  (his real "
"     'No, but we'd better keep our eyes skinned till we do.  If we're caught "
"cunning.  At Aragorn's bidding they paddled now  for  long  spells, and  the "
"     The tents began to  go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so big "
"     'It does not belong  to either of us,'  said Aragorn; `but it has  been "
"     'Boromir son of  the Lord Denethor?' said  Faramir, and a strange stern "
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost  
"dark valley. But to what she will awake: hope, or forgetfulness, or despair, "
"South,  but  hardly  anything  from the Shire.  I heard  about  the Ring, of "
sweeter meat. And Gollum had brought it to her. 
"disappeared.  The  dwarves  groaned,  but  still  Bilbo  stood  almost  without  moving. "
altogether  precious. When he  took  it out he had intended to fling it from 
"Amos Aspel,4041598809765874,28-02-1983
"
"Pedro Clarae,4041596785675307,09-11-1994
"
     And left him lonely still to roam 
"Clarey Breakwell,4976360027257724,22-03-1986
"
down  from the  hills to feed  the  stagnant pools and mires beyond.  Gollum 
####-Then  Gandalf  lit  up  his  wand.  Of  course  it  was  Gandalf;  but  just  then  they 
"water; but he drew back. ""I cannot swim,"" he said. "
"if you would speak to me, or walk at whiles with me.' "
""
shook his fist at her. 
head must stand the secret door. Day by day they came back to their camp without 
"dulling men's  wariness, or working on their fears,  as served the occasion. "
"tossed  his head and neighed,  and  turning sped  towards the host  like  an "
drag of the Ring that made him cower  and stoop as he walked. The Eye:  that 
great  hurry.  Merry expects  us some time the day after  tomorrow; but that 
to spread. There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country. There 
"     'Then you know  or guess something about this  rider?' said Pippin, who "
""
"voice  that  had  kept  the  trolls  bickering  and  quarrelling,  until  the  light  came  and "
"     'That  was  only  a  guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does  not know "
"     `Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. `He is not half "
they had crawled and stumbled to its very feet. 
"anything, when they stumbled into a big cavern. "
"Rowen Lghan,4249001227379,28-04-1983
"
show as good a following!' 
a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the darkness he made a noise in 
"men have fallen in battle?  If  you go to war,  needlessly,  for  I did  not "
"Trudie Durrad,4529482661711,12-04-1978
"
he  said nothing.  'A  pawn did  Gandalf  say?  Perhaps  but  on  the  wrong 
"too,  of  nasty  slimy  things,  with  big  bulging  blind  eyes,  wriggling  in  the  water. "
young  hobbit who  had offered him what  he  called `sauce'  when questioned 
shut. 
"flowering banks, until it came to a greenwood at the lawn's foot and  passed "
"need a  bigger Boss. And you'll get one  before the year is  out, if there's "
"of  grove or thicket, or crawling, hardly visible  in their brown and  green "
"Wren Kaming,4041596667289847,10-04-2000
"
"Ivett Millson,4017953829297384,10-04-1978
"
"grim years were removed from the  face of Aragorn, and he  seemed clothed in "
land of their home. Under  the lifting skirts of the dreary canopy dim light 
####-<h4>Chapter 6.</h4> <br> The Old Forest 
"you can, and  any old  songs and  tales you can come by. I'll do  my best to "
for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot  see you in the shadow 
torch  vanished  from  the  sight  of  the  watching  dwarves.  But  soon  they  saw  it  far 
as they could  tell:  they had  almost lost count of  the  hours during which 
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.  
honour and peace.' 
"     'No, no, never! He's lost his Precious,' said Gollum. "
"be the name of my house, if that be ever established.  In the high tongue it "
128d 
"name  of evil,  and yet  unreal, a  legend that had no part in  their simple "
"buried. They despaired, until I  returned and told them  that the  drift was "
oldest  grandfather. The Wood-elves  themselves began  to wonder greatly and even 
if chance it was. 
"frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it  seemed faint "
"out west,  and faded. Then all the sky was  clean and blue and birds sang in "
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had 
"     Gollum  cast up and down along the  brink,  and at length he  called to "
"On  they  went,  Gollum  flip-flapping  ahead,  hissing  and  cursing;  Bilbo  behind "
"reckoned it, and it took me many  months; for  I lost my horse at Tharbad, at "
"away, seemed for the moment to  have  been blinded.  The darkness before him "
"so, using the  weapon of the Dark Lord for her  good and my glory.  No. I do "
"counsel, for they will say both no and yes.' "
"thing, there are some among us with strength enough to wield it. That too he "
"####-herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part "
"     'Of course, it  is likely  enough, my friends,' he said slowly, 'likely "
"tempest of war, and every ear glinted with barbed light. "
"into the middle of the ring, he strode up to his master's side. "
"above  them; and then  at  themselves in their thin  white rags, crowned and "
####-lands at all. We were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought us to the 
at Crickhollow.' 
     As they looked out of  the window there came falling gently as if it was 
latter days they defended  the hills for a while against  the evil that came 
"all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock  "
####-the sweet influence of the herb  stole about the chamber it seemed to  those 
"Bette Scarratt,4041374882082,27-09-2001
"
"men, still these two of his charges prospered and grew daily in strength. "
"simple men at night, if the D®nedain were asleep, or were all gone into  the "
they only thought of how to cross it without wetting themselves in its water. There 
office  of  Thain had  passed  to them  (from the Oldbucks)  some  centuries 
"####-have descended  from the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill river that "
     They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the roof.  
"     'You speak justly, lord,'  said the pale man sitting upon the steps  of "
"Manfred Turbayne,4121628570020,15-11-1997
"
Folco Boffin and Fredegar  Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends 
in  the flooded Ford.  On  the  rocks  of  the  rapids  below  it  searchers 
"goblins, and do not need to see you to catch you! "
"do more harm than good, but in his pity he could not  keep silent. 'Then let "
"     'I will,' he said. "
"     When he heard what Frodo had  to tell, he became full  of concern,  and "
"""That leaves you just ten minutes. You will have to run,"" said Gandalf. "
it;  but  a  slumbering  and  smiling  Bombur  was  a  poor  exchange  for  packs  filled 
"here, and I'll  squeeze  your  eyes out, like I did to Radbug just now.  And "
"Jewel Polamontayne,4041594163214,23-07-1992
"
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep. 
from 
"     `If that  is so,  it wi ll be some time before they  can begin the  hunt "
"frowns. And as  for the Lady here, I do not trust her:  she always hated me, "
####-the Ring-wraiths had met his doom. 
ground and felt that he could endure no more: he  must either find an ending 
the scent again. The miserable creature must  have  been hiding in the woods 
     The last  part  of  the order was  carried  out mercilessly. But Pippin 
     At last  the  hobbits had  their  faces  turned towards home. They were 
"Daryn Lawling,4539291355965564,19-09-1985
"
"Follow, follow stars that leap "
As  he  listened  to  the  talk  of  the  raftmen  and  pieced  together  the  scraps  of 
small that it looked like a dark crack and no more. It was not a cave and was open 
"There is no doubt that he  was tormented, and the fear of Sauron  lies black  "
"went about  the streets, heedless of the many  glances  that men gave  them. "
hundred yards a nd more beyond  the Hedge;  but it  vanished  as  soon as  it 
To dungeons deep and caverns dim 
"vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake.  I don't know but it  felt "
"place, investigating nooks  and comers and  tapping the  floors. He escorted "
will keep watch for what is left of the night.  I wish I could  lay my hands 
"starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and "
"that  they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up of "
was  meant by 'coming  into his inheritance'. Together we score one  hundred  
"have forgotten when."" "
"right, there was  a flight of steps cut  in the  rock at their side, but the "
"Tessie Iglesia,4017957461742,19-05-1996
"
"can  tell  you.  They  could  not  see Bilbo,  but  they  could make  a  good  guess  at  the "
suddenly laughed aloud. 
"     'If you were  in a hurry,  the road would have served you better,' said "
"Allissa Padbury,4017952393767848,25-06-1996
"
clicked. The sound was ominous. 
 
"     `Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice fish, scorching it. Give me fish now, "
house.  You  must  have  noticed him among the  company:  a swarthy sneering 
""
""
"still  in peace in Rivendell.  Come now, Frodo, tell us what you  are doing?  "
"doing. And  after what has happened tonight another will come, I think,  and "
"their hearts  went cold, and the valour of Gondor  withered into ash. And so "
"little,  and drank  sparingly.  Gollum  ate nothing, but  he  accepted water  "
     'Alas! For she was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of her mind 
"of such a hauberk; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather, a belt, and a  "
"cloak  and  tightened it, and settled  his  light pack on  his back; then he "
Aragorn. 
"with Sam, and he handed over his keys.  There was  a big book with plain red "
"     Pippin introduced  the other two to the farmer. 'Mr. Frodo Baggins,' he "
"varying  at need,  was  employed  to  'beat  the  bounds', and to  see  that "
"and then vanish. And behind us there were  noises like thunder in hills, but "
"Renata Darrington,4017951506075776,21-01-1976
"
either hand  leaped up  to  follow him. They circled up  in  the sky and  looked down 
"Hashim Carruth,4041598346612027,20-01-1982
"
"mind ¢f Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if "
"     It  was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon "
"     Then hope unlooked-for came so  suddenly to Jomer's  heart, and with it "
but even  then  he  had  not  thought of Gandalf as  one  of them. What  was 
behind Gandalf a t the  far end of the bridge. The others halted  just within 
"I  should  not  have  liked  to  have  been  in Mr. Baggins'  place,  all  the  same. The "
"and amazed, and they were quickly  slain or driven off. Before the  ruin  of "
"wait a bit and see."" "
"first, nice hobbits!' "
"shock  he realized that  this was the smoke  from  his  little cooking-fire, "
"Conrado Waddams,4041596748524519,05-12-1977
"
"out,  and  so  he  was  making  for  it.  And  then  he  sat  down  in  the  entrance,  and  I "
"benches were lying there overturned, charred and decaying. Skulls and bones were "
"wisdom, and a majesty that  was veiled.  And he was  older, far older.  'How "
"     Aragorn  went first to Faramir, and then to the Lady Jowyn, and last to "
arch?  ' 
"he was toasting, and wiped his lips on his sleeve. "
""
not be fastened. 
"had dominated, and who wandered homeless and masterless  aft er his fall.  It "
"matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my friend "
"companions…"" "
the feet of Amon Hen.  Behind it rose the first gentle  slopes  of  the hill 
any Rider of Rohan again. Not long after far away  eastward  the faint drums 
and Elendil's Stone was on the Tower Hills that look towards M ithlond in the 
"not kiss it,  though his  tears fell on it. Then  he turned away,  drew  his "
"trees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can "
honoured.' 
"made into supper, and that will be much worse than having none ourselves."" "
ground was a drinking-cup  and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was 
     Hastily they crept away  and slipped down the north side of the hill to 
"not do so, not without a great  struggle. He weighed the  Ring in his  hand, "
Against  some  I  have not  yet been measured. But my  time  is  coming. The 
Dark hides  us now. Bu t what the  day  will  show  who can tell?  Have  your 
Shire and  talking about roads and adventures.  There  is  a seed of courage 
"Em Carus,4017956166722344,20-12-1999
"
were pursuing me;  but now  at any rate they seem to  have  missed me and to 
     The  night-wind  blew  chill up the valley to  meet them. Before them a  
a way through. 
"So they called him Gollum, and cursed him, and told him to go far  away; and "
"would try  to keep them out, I think, at any  rate until  they got a message "
of  late. In this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed one  
"Barnabas Jouaneton,4017954292462,25-07-1984
"
"pushed all the barrels together into the shallows, and when they had counted them "
protected  at  night!–  but  I  should  ride  fast;  for  if  they  make  their  raid  soon  they 
     'Of course he started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing which 
perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff's  foot. Crouching stone-still in 
"whistling over  their heads, or crashing on the path beside them. Every  now "
had come out on top: that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the 
"""Hullo!""  said  Beorn.  ""You  came  pretty  quick-where were  you  hiding? Come "
"Yance Kendrew,4041371214743,23-07-1975
"
near and  thick. He looked up  and saw with  surprise  that faint stars were 
twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three. 
not wanted.' 
"have been sent  to you to teach you the pass-words, and to  tell you some of "
""
"no longer either desire  or need of sleep, but  rather  of  watchfulness. He "
"     At the word hungry a greenish light  was kindled in Gollum's pale eyes,  "
""
"swords, and the  joy and wonder of the  City  was a music of trumpets and  a  "
"     'True  enough,'  said Hbma; 'but for myself, I will  wait  until I  see "
"do  not  look for mirth at  the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere Thjoden "
"     'What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly. "
"     And with that shout the king came. His horse  was white as snow, golden "
"     Frodo  did not answer, but moved away  till the great  flat stone stood "
thing he ever did. The tremendous things that happened afterward were as nothing 
overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him. 
 
"said 'Neither  this country, nor anything else  outside the Golden  Wood, is "
them. The Mirror is dangerous as a guide of deeds.' 
man's brow. It was drenched with sweat; but Faramir did not move or make any 
"stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a  "
"should be his wife,  and she grants it full willing. Therefore they shall be "
"     ` ""Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord  of Rohan sits in his "
"the house came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught,  among "
"####-nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and  he ate  all the rest  of "
"Valentin Wyne,4041593199656874,17-06-1993
"
"     'It's not  always  a misfortune being overlooked,' said Merry.  'I  was "
"Ashley Cargo,4041370539389,27-12-2001
"
"""It is warm enough inside,"" said Bilbo. "
"Heinrik Renhard,4017957465903981,14-07-1988
"
"     `Nothing? ' said  Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a keen "
"hunt  is  up! Even if  we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journey  "
"     'It is,' said Gandalf. 'One  of the twain. The other is with Thjoden of "
     Above the shadow of his head. 
adventures.  Nasty  .disturbing  uncomfortable  things! Make  you  late  for  dinner!  I 
"     'Few may do that with honour,' he answered.  'But as for you, lady: did "
"foot, when  Bilbo  returned  to  the  camp;  and not many were  in  the valley  save  the "
"     'Dark  tidings,'  said Thjoden,  'yet  not  all  unguessed. But say  to "
"Aguistin Flatte,4187798837405840,24-02-1999
"
the brooch.' 
"Viviyan Durban,4978983072034108,26-01-1977
"
"     'So it must be,  for you are  appointed to the White Company, the Guard "
"Allys Cosin,4041370846521581,05-08-1997
"
"burn, and ruin; and now it s come to killing. There s  no longer even any bad "
deep in the woods and far from the northern border.' 
"wish that  they dared, and be shamed  and unhappy.  I think, Elrond, that in "
"Aarika Altham,4041379386662010,08-01-1988
"
know.' 
breathing. 
     The voices of my people that have gone before me? 
dwarves make  light  of burdens;  and in  his  belt was a  broad-bladed axe. 
"indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you a re  doing as Gandalf "
"love you, if only because of the pains you have cost me, which I shall never  "
"     In the wavering firelight  Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose up, "
"""I am  the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the stinging fly. I as chosen for the lucky "
"healed.  But I  cannot  lie  in sloth,  idle,  caged. I looked  for death in "
look of joy on his face. 
 
thought  and  word.  He  smiled. `You  feel the  power of  the  Lady of  the 
"""Yes,  yes,  my  dear  sir  -  and  I  do  know  your  name, Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins.  And "
"them, an island  in the waters,  about  which   the flowing River  flung pale "
theme was  settled from  the outset by the  inevitable choice of the Ring as 
ridden straight off.  
that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!' 
     Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke. 
     Ever since the middle  night the  great assault had gone  on. The drums 
"return to Rohan.  We  must not  be  daunted by Fangorn, since need drove him "
"you, and you need do no more than use  your feet and hands  to fend yourself "
"for,""  he  said.  ""We  need  food,  for  one  thing,  and  rest  in  reasonable  safety-also it is "
"Sidney Gyves,4041379974561,18-03-1987
"
"thought of him, I daren't think. His only comfort was he couldn't be mistaken for a "
"household  were  in  the   Hornburg,  and  there  also  were   many  of  the  "
more! It  is plain  enough  what you are  pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit 
Smash the bottles and burn the corks! 
like to go walking  today and  explore the valley. I should like to get into 
     Another bed  was  set beside him for his  servant. Sam hesitated for  a  
"Strider,  Aragorn that is, or  old Mr. Bilbo, for that.  But I wish  I could "
gulf of air between  him and the untrodden isle.  The voice of Rauros was  a  
"     `This  is grievous news concerning Saruman,' he  said; `for  we trusted "
doubt it.  He  is  pitted against a foe too great.  For one has come  that I 
"terror will overshadow the last armies of  our friends, cutting off the sun. "
"     No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but no "
arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. 'You would  die before  your 
"     For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS,  as  a PRESENT,  on  a  case  of  "
slope to it he did not know. First he must ease his aching back. He lay flat 
"the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and when the echoes "
behind!' 
"shooting at the  fires, until Ugl®k  stopped them. The riders made no sound.  "
"afraid. And yet, as you see,  I will not touch  the creature. For now that I "
rather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside  her umbrella.  Her  
"the  right? They knew of  nothing  to guide  them, yet a false choice  would "
"Alfredo Haydn,4017957366990,22-07-1981
"
sticks. He slept curled up on the hard rock more soundly than ever he had done on 
"remained of the  elven-cakes:  broken  fragments for abou t five meagre days, "
"was  completed,  they  could see great wains approaching; and soon yet  more "
coverlet. 
"ceiling like scarlet lightning. ""Revenge! The King under the Mountain is dead and "
"Charlean Braybrookes,4041370785727,16-04-1982
"
"whole story had to be revised, and indeed  largely re-written backwards. And "
"     'And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,' said Aragorn. "
""
tremendous  slice  of  luck  you  may  come  out  one  day  and  see  the  Long  Marshes 
The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: 
So  it was  that Bilbo was  able  to  take  secretly Thorin's message  to  each of  the 
"     'And ere morning  it will be in  the East,' said Legolas.  'But rest if "
kindred have long  ago  departed and  we  too are  now only  tarrying here a  
"Melisenda Simonite,4017958442840,14-08-1978
"
"the  shores and  looked on  the  ruins of  the  town. Their welcome was good, as may "
     With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the 
when. 
"     When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade; "
"him for days.  Then we found him in a corner;  hanging up he was, but he was "
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall 
Muil  far  away upon  their  left. Dawn came clear and bright; a wind  swept  
Bilbo.  'Not that hobbits  would ever acquire quite  the elvish appetite for  
come  along quiet. We're going to  take you to Bywater and hand  you over to 
"The dragon stopped short in his boasting. ""Your information is antiquated,"" he "
"renown that shall not be forgotten; and you  are  a lady  beautiful, I deem, "
"had made for its own defence, but which now  hindered it in its  unquiet and "
"later, "
under the grey trees. The king  summoned the captains to council. Jomer sent 
"we know  not  yet  how things  stand upon the field.  Forth now, and fear no  "
     One of the guards ran down the stair.  Another went to the  well at the 
"     'Then Isildur said to  their king: ""Thou shalt be the last king. And if "
could in the shadows. 
quite sure whether laughing was allowed. A dozen Shirriffs had been told off 
 
""
can 
said Frodo. 
"     'Do not weep, lord,' he stammered. 'Perhaps he will get well. Have  you  "
"and  all,  told  all  over  again, with  the  ring  in  its  proper  place. But  after  a  time  the "
"blade. 'This was made for just  such an hour,' he thought. 'If only  I could "
"the  other. Nor  do I  think that we  should succeed, if we tried. There are "
two esquires to  serve  the kings; or  so they seemed to be: one was clad in 
"filled with  things that they already knew, set out fair and  square with no "
trouser-pocket. 
"slain also, while here  and there lay  many  carcases of the great  Southron "
you've caught the kitten and let the cat escape.' 
"Katharina Fairbeard,4041376212519851,27-05-1986
"
"trees escape, at any rate not until morning. And long before that, they said, goblin "
"Reinwald Mooney,4017955016894,27-09-1999
"
"they were willing  to face even the  terror  of the Door, if  their masters' "
"minds calmed and cleared. The herb had  also some  power over the wound, for  "
"themselves, or  cast themselves  in pits,  or  fled wailing  back to hide in "
"When they come  to the  bridge they will see  us. Come away!  Climb,  climb!  "
Suddenly  the  cliff  fell  away. The  shores  sank. The  trees  ended. Then Bilbo  saw  a 
"the mountains  after long wandering. One of these was  Ohtar, the esquire of "
"""Good!"" growled Beorn. ""It is some good being a wizard, then."" "
"rushes. There were four deep  mattresses, each  piled  with white  blankets,  "
"Damon Covell,4017954401365946,27-10-1987
"
"though he believed that Gandalf was  gone, gone  for ever into the shadow in "
"Jolene Tabert,4041599524466707,24-09-1979
"
"were  the  Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as  plain as plain.  How it  "
years have they forgotten their  grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the 
"outside, dismissed to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of "
"Their plans were soon made. With the women and the children, the old and the "
"with a shrill whistling shriek he fell. As he did so, he curled his legs and "
straw  and  other  stuff  to  pack  them  in  as  cosily  as  could  be  managed  in  a  short 
"come, and go when their part's ended. Our part will end later  -- or sooner.' "
"vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits  leaped to their feet. There  was "
"     'As a father you shall be to me,' said Merry. "
"take.  It looks every step  of fifty miles,' he muttered gloomily staring at "
"Tanner McKiddin,4041593300924,16-08-1995
"
"horses. They  love  their horses next  to their kin. And not without reason, "
"he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several  cushions, he felt very "
"of Gandalf). Gollum in  his  own  way,  and with  much  more excuse  as  his "
"     The  thought came suddenly into Pippin's mind, as if caught direct from "
"     `Go  then and be swift! ' said Faramir. `If  he  comes  off  alive,  he "
"     `Yes, I've  got  it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. `It "
"Zack Radborne,4041377069943,18-08-1981
"
""
"a falling rock, burying those beneath him. Blackness and stench and crushing "
days hardly remembered among the hobbits  themselves. It  no longer surprised 
"was alone, forgotten, without escape upon the hard horn  of the world. There "
"Mr. Frodo, let's go down the path at any rate!' "
"""Urn!""  said  the Great Goblin.  ""So you  say! Might  I  ask what you were doing "
"it. He knows or  guesses something about i t. But does he tell  us  what? No, "
forget her!' 
     'What shall we do?  ' he said.  'We have walked long  and far. Shall we 
"and  a little  separated from the  others. It  had a  conical top,  slightly "
dead and has passed down the River to the Sea.' 
"the  west wall  of the  hollow  in which  they lay; north, south, and  east, "
"must tread, you and I. Come with  me!  ' And taking Frodo's hand in  his, he "
"adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.' "
"at least the match of yours.  Yet  she  was doomed to wait  upon an old man, "
"Morie Carley,4164309116523,28-11-1979
"
"hearts were  hot, for away in  the North we saw a red glow under the  cloud,  "
"Rolando Heineking,4486870689103,08-06-1981
"
bidding.' 
still only a grey  light came to the dreary fields of Gorgoroth. There smokes 
"Vivien Ledward,4017953811817,01-10-1992
"
     `Very funny!  ' 
"skirts  of  the  Green  Hills  towards  Woody-End,  a  wild  corner  of  the "
"Sheridan Bennetts,4017952698406977,22-10-1977
"
could have stayed here and et the best hay  till the  new grass comes.' Bill 
"time at  the Grey Havens away to the west, and in other  places within reach "
"     `I  don't know how long we shall take to -- to finish,' said Frodo. `We "
     'Nothing or a double helping is  your way!'  said Merry. 'I am afraid I 
"Julita Blampy,4616328371694,01-09-1999
"
useful possessions. In fact they praised him so much that Bilbo began to feel there 
"Jodie Simek,4041591521571175,18-02-1984
"
"     'What do you mean?' said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment.  "
with  sombre trees  like  dark clouds. but  all about  them  lay  a  tumbled 
"standard, but it was close-furled  in a black cloth  bound about  with  many "
bellowing as they came. Like a  storm they broke upon the line of the men of 
"     When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King Jomer. "
"eat, and then set out again, I hear.' "
""
mishap they reached the little grassy bay.  
"Augie Hansed,4017951204313362,11-08-1985
"
Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem  to  speak of a  person. Who is 
lost their tinder-boxes. (Dwarves have never taken to matches even yet.) 
     Gimli  halted and  stooped  to  the  ground. 'I  hear  nothing but  the 
where there was no hold even  for  his strong hobbit  fingers and the ledges 
destroyed. But don't stand here! Go  on! You  will have to  do without light 
"Ardath Mynett,4017952515690191,09-04-1999
"
""
"     `From the first my heart misgave  me,  against all reason that I knew,' "
"now, except in my hand, and  I shall need both hands in the blind night. But "
"     `That  will  soon  be cured,'  said  Pippin. `You have shown your usual "
"Ronni Size,4121741604946,26-09-1998
"
"something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.' "
     When the light of day was come into the  sky  but  the sun was  not yet 
and I belong both to Gondor and the North.' 
"     `Shall we shoot? ' said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo. "
"things happened,  but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of water, "
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes. 
we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.' 
"stepped towards the edge. `I'm going to try it,' he said. "
"hastened.'  He looked up, and it seemed that  he had made some decision; his "
immediately  went  to  the  end  of  the  branch  nearest  the  tree-trunk  and  kept  back 
afterwards  in  those  regions  and  ruled  a wide  land between  the mountains  and  the 
"Shagrat, a large orc with long  arms that,  as  he ran crouching, reached to "
     Thinking  of all  these things Sam went back to his  master.  He had no 
"     'Not here, the banks are too steep,' said Pippin. 'Forward now!' "
     `No!' said Haldir. `We have two  more ropes. We  will fasten them above 
stair and steep path to meet the main road under the frowning walls close to  
     There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief space. 
"grew.  I called  for the help of the D®nedain, and their watch  was doubled; "
singing. He remembered  the rhyme  that  Tom  had taught  them. In  a  small 
 
the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will not  help Saruman to tell 
"window, glazed with grimy glass, through which he was  peering. Wrenching "
"'And I'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop "
"from every inn and eating-house  for miles around, arrived to supplement the "
one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess.  
"in Orthanc. So  whether  he  will  or  no,  he  will appear a rebel. Yet  he "
"now be certain, but  I think  there were many booted feet.'  He  paused  and "
There  was  no  sound  but  the  sound of  their own feet; the dull stump of 
"abroad. They passed over this field ere the sunrise, though few of the  weary "
hobbit again showed his usefulness. 
He grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice master. 
"skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.' "
yet  not  beyond the measure of the  others. After a little while  he turned 
now  slowly at the end  of  the day. Presently the  path turned round a huge 
"bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?' "
a dais with three steps; and  in the  middle of the dais was a great  gilded 
"breast, but in  his hand he  held a drawn sword; and as he knelt  he offered "
and said: 
mines in the Blue Mountains. They  were the  hobbits' chief  source of  news 
"Bertrando Hiom,4041370687116954,27-11-1980
"
"tobacco out of doors, into the bargain. If you have a pipe about you, sit down  and "
"behind, mournful now and slow; doom! "
"next came  Merry  and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony,  which was "
"filled with an everlasting music  of  water that tinkles into pools, as fair "
"journeyed  thus far  by the  west -ways, for  they had  much  to speak of with "
""
"his throat: gollum, gollum. 'Nothing, my precious,' he added. "
"That  sounded  nice  and  comforting,  but  they  had  not  got  there  yet,  and  it was "
was  forgetting:  singing that song  put  me in mind  of  old times;  almost  
"     'Gandalf, Gandalf! ' cried Pippin, and Shadowfax halted. "
"and the Wild, the Men of Darkness.  "
"of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off with Fatty (that is "
fortunes.  Sam  was chewing an  apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full  of 
     A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue's red eyes. 'You told me to;  
"again, and still alive!' "
     `Nothing  decided!' cried Pippin. 'Then what  were  you  all doing? You  
more skilled  was  their knighthood with long spears  and bitter. Fewer were 
here. You used to be on the Hay Gate.' 
"his companions, but he said nothing: the bones  were best  left in peace and "
do not tire sooner  than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they have a long 
"and the cliffs: it  was  narrow,  often  hardly  a  dozen yards  across, and "
them  so.  They  were  elves  of  course.  Soon  Bilbo  caught  glimpses  of  them  as  the 
"Ainslie Castilljo,4041590004727569,01-07-1998
"
"Cynthy Goulborn,4359177559186817,08-07-1977
"
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends 
'Helm! Helm!  Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped  down the  stair from 
     Beregond bowed his  head  to  hide his tears.  'They said that  he  was 
and slowly through the heavy air dull rumbles could be heard. 
""
"Beorn  was  a  fierce  enemy.  But  now  he  was  their  friend,  and  Gandalf  thought  it "
"     Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away! "
"the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded  him. "
"     'I'm not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam. 'But  I'd like to know what "
of Rohan;  but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were  taken in the  Emyn 
"and  a  dangerous  path,  a  crooked  way  and  a  lonely  and  a  long.  Now  they  could "
seem  likely to him  that  many of them would survive it. But he thought  of 
"tomorrow,'  said  Celeborn.  'I will send my people to you in the morning to "
"sun-breaks during the day, was now  hidden in shadow. But their eyes did not "
was  much coming  and  going between  Buckland and Bag  End.  The two  
"     `And you? ' she said, turning to Sam.  'For this is what your folk would "
"     `Alas!  alas!' cried Legolas,  and in  his  fair  elvish face there was "
"battle were afoot!"" "
"want to have me throat cut in me sleep. Hold his toes in the fire, till he talks!"" "
"     Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and  brooded "
"out,  or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at  night things  can be most  "
soon he was betrayed by  it  to  his death; and so  it is named in the North 
"the heir of Isildur may use  it, if he  dare. Listen! This is the word  that "
     'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back  of the  porch. `Evil 
"the  Woody End. Two more fell as they ran.  Merry blew a loud horn-call, and "
"asked, I  guess. But seldom  does thief  ride  home to the  stable. Here are "
"for  a  hobbit!  His  stomach  felt  all  empty  and  loose  and  his  legs  all  wobbly,  now "
"     The  hobbits looked at him,  and  saw  with surprise that  his face was "
was  still alive  and had leaves  on  the small branches that it had put out 
"####-for trouble anyhow,' said Frodo. `I'm  afraid our journey  is  drawing to an "
one by  the hand and went on their way. All that Frodo and Sam knew of  this 
sparkling with  the present: like sun shimmering on the  outer  leaves of  a  
"     'More than we.  Good  provision,  it is said. And  the air is wholesome "
"sitting in  the  shadows near the  wall, was  also listening intently to the "
ran  out  of  the  heights  of  the  forest  and  flowed on  and out  into  the marshes  at  the 
"The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he  himself "
starlings  and  flocks  of  finches;  and  far  off  there  are  many  carrion  birds  as  if  a 
and the Council put forth its strength  and  drove  the evil out of Mirkwood 
forth and blew a blast: 
in it was laden with blossom. 
     'But I  have so  little of any  of  these  things!  You  are  wise  and 
punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits him.' 
"""Most astonishing wonderful!"" "
me 
"Katheryn Flew,4969735134151853,04-08-1993
"
"     Then Denethor  leaped upon  the  table, and  standing there wreathed in "
"have  been dark, for its windows looked out only into the  tunnel. But light "
"turn, or beside some opening  that  led into the higher levels of the Tower. "
"     ' ""Saruman,"" I  said, standing away from him, ""only one hand at  a time "
"     'You  fool,'  snarled Shagrat.  'You've been talking very  clever,  but "
"slowly he began to crawl aside; but the Black  Captain, in doubt  and malice "
 
"Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given "
can from here.' 
"Simona Dmisek,4017956456848668,29-10-1982
"
Smjagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest? ' 
Lane! He  always was a  stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads that were all 
"     'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look  "
"forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of  the North,  "
"Dark Power, he saw nonetheless only those things which  that Power permitted "
that was lost. 
"entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here. "
"Sam was  more than half way up  the base, and the pla in of Gorgoroth was dim "
"Darren McLoney,4041590964482,05-12-1986
"
     Chapter 10  Strider  
"in the thicket, and  the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring, and "
"East are still restrained,  and the terror of Morgul  kept at bay; and  thus "
"to the ground, with all its legs curled up. "
"from the wind by  the ridge behind, and the air  was still  and stuffy. When "
""
"####-Company! This  is  your  expedition  after  all. Think  of  the  treasure  at  the  end,  and "
understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?' 
"even as they turned to meet this new attack, the elves charged again with renewed "
a 
I'll be pleased.' 
wind. 
"a  group  of Orcs: they  were standing listening, and they did not appear to "
"For a  while he and Frodo lay back and watched the torchlight, and  the  men "
"will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.' "
"again without  thinking of  him, and  that day, Pippin, when he  rode up  to "
when your summons came.' 
 
"     'You passed through the Hidden Land,' said  Faramir, `but it seems that "
     'Amroth for Gondor!' they cried. 'Amroth to Faramir!' 
"river of  swelling gold  and  silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous "
were the D®nadan's?' 
     is a puff of air. 
"precious. And I'd make him look for turnips  and carrots, and taters too, if "
further  supplies for  the  longer  journey  they were now expecting. It was 
as  they  could.  No  sooner  did  Tom  see  Balin  come  into  the  light  than he gave an 
"and as Frodo watched with his mind, not willing it but in suspense (as if he "
"Rikki Pavolini,4041596448512038,16-08-1979
"
####-East -mountains. It is the opening of day in the sky-fields.' 
""
if Legolas is not willing to leave us.' 
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.  
he fell asleep at last in his tent. 
"Men once dwelt  here, ages ago;  but  none remain  now. They  became an evil "
"     '""Treebeard,"" said Gandalf. ""I need your help. You have done much,  but "
"age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria. "
secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of 
it weren't for these thieving ruffians.' 
"     `No food, no rest, nothing for Smjagol,' said Gollum. `He's a sneak.' "
"     `No,  no,  not  yet,'  Gollum whined. `O no!  They  can't  find the way "
"seemed  an unusual  amount of burning  going  on, and  smoke rose  from many "
"nothing, hut sank to his knees, shading his eyes.  "
only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I  
"up,  looking at Frodo's face,  and Sam's. Then he shut  off the light again, "
     'Let us go  up on to this green hill!' he said.  Wearily they  fol lowed 
"Tell me more! Why did no help  come? And how  did you escape, and yet he "
expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this!' He went to the  back of the 
"wet  and  cold  and  sorrow  that  night,  and  afterwards  died,  who  had  escaped "
Purpose. Something in  the way  that he said this made an impression.  There 
"you had not been chosen, then some marshal or captain would have been set in "
"thicker;  and as the lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills, "
got to his feet and found that  he could walk and bear his burden. And for a  
""
     `Thirty ells! '  said Frodo considering. 'I believe it would be enough. 
he lifted up his hands and cried in  a loud voice ringing above the din: The 
"surprise he felt tired but lighter, and his head seemed clear again. No more "
"Antoni Whicher,4041593810114055,25-06-1996
"
"risen above the high  ridges in the East,  Aragorn made ready to depart. His "
"####-me still.  His fire was  quenched, but now he was a thing of slime, stronger  "
"     'Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?' said Pippin. "
"jaw-cracker dwarf-language  must be!' Maps  conveyed nothing  to Sam's mind, "
"     Gandalf laughed. I hope he will. But nobody will read the book, however  "
gates with the rising of the Sun. 
"The brave things  in the old  tales and songs,  Mr. Frodo: adventures,  as I "
"Rouvin Marzella,4017959889463576,21-02-1998
"
"     'Foolishness!' said Gandalf. 'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is "
"Corrie Doyle,4740618556351001,29-07-1993
"
""
"the mighty craft and labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide "
for a moment measuring it with his eyes  -- `about eighteen  fathoms I should  
blue  eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the 
you now than  appears  on the surface. Good luck to you!' He turned away and 
""
"Inside  the  hall  it was  now  quite  dark. Beorn  clapped  his  hands,  and  in  trotted "
day is out. But good luck to you - today and every day!' 
belongs  to  the  next  chapter  and  the  beginning  of  another  adventure  in  which  the 
"provision  would take them to  their goal; and when the task was done, there "
""
delight to slash and beat down  growing  things that are not even  in  their 
or care sits on him.' 
     The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea. 
and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End  was rather  pleasant. For some  years he was 
"but horrible sounds, strings  of words would now and again shape  themselves:  "
of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.' 
"     `The rain's nearly  given over already,'  said Sam;  'but  don't you go "
words; and  he  thought  that he understood now  something of the grief  and 
"Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not come to them.' "
     of women and of elven-maids 
"and  he  gazed  motionless,  almost  forgetting  the  frightful  guardian,  at  the  gold "
"     'Frodo  Baggins  at  your  service  and  your   family's,'  said  Frodo "
"     'Well, Master Peregrin,  I hope that you used yesterday to your profit, "
"Torrance Brindley,4041593834942143,01-04-2000
"
"eyes  shone  with  a green-white light, reflecting  the noisome Morgul-sheen "
Beside  them  a  pony  pushed  two  low-seated  benches  with  wide  rush-bottoms and 
"once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is he?' "
"on the west  side  of the River. He stiffened.  There were  cries, and among "
""
"Jaime Billany,4041379540602,19-06-1987
"
as  well.  You  must  have  heard  the  ugly  names  they were  calling  after  us. But  the 
     Shortly  afterwards  Sam saw the  torches  disappear. Then there  was a  
     (as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs  of Bilbo and Frodo of 
     During all this black day Faramir  lay  upon his bed  in the chamber of 
"and the food's very good, and there are Elves when you want  them. What more "
"reeking  head was swathed in cloud. Its fires were now  dimmed, and it stood "
"Bink Cadore,4113401452997774,02-02-1980
"
Strider. 
"tongue  cleave to  his mouth,  and  his heart labouring. His sword broke and  "
"of  rock, water  dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling  fall of  a loosened "
"of  the Desolation of  the Dragon. The  air was  filled with  circling  flocks,  and  their "
"think it sounded more like fright than excitement! In fact, if it bad not been for the "
"     `And let us  hope that none  will  ever speak it  here again,' answered "
plant. 
"Cecil Tanzer,4041371913471940,22-07-1992
"
####-dully  through it. But in the West  the dying  sun had  set all  the fume on 
"had not come  very far from the road, and yet even  in so short a space they "
and to prevent them from trespassing. 
"way, hiding from Orcs.' "
sight  Pippin perceived that  Gandalf had  the greater power and the  deeper 
"were marching away. I  don't know much about this war, or about the "
he could make of Grishnbkh's desire. 
running in. 'They're coming!' they said. 'A score or more. But two have gone  
     There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was  already 
"Darrin Kyd,4041375252945257,24-06-1988
"
"say!"" "
"he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree, as if he was "
expected to  be resisted.  They have drawn off for the  time being. But  not 
"it is won, what grief will it be, even if I fall, spending my last strength?  "
"beggar, slouching and whining. "
lunch and  tea were marked chiefly by  the fact that at  those times all the 
"running  and  swinging  towards  the  hobbit,  flinging  out  their  long  threads  in  all "
"Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the  Worm. Eorl the Young "
"     `There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms "
     The orc-band  began to descend a  narrow ravine  leading down into  the 
or to summon any help. 
drawn blade ready for battle. But  Gollum did not spring. He fell  flat upon 
much the same kind as before. This is something like it: 
"from the top. Jomer was there. No helm was on his head, no  mail  was on his "
"that  Beorn  had  warned  them  against  it,  or  they  would  have  drunk  from  it, "
forth  again.  A  company  of  twenty  was  approaching.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
the  one  idea  of  begging  for  some  food.  No  sooner  had  the  first  stepped  into  the 
"holes, eh? It  sounds very right and proper. Who calls  you hobbits, though?  "
"Seana Tremoille,4041597661382844,07-09-2000
"
now!  Let's get away  at once!' They hurried up the path to the top  of  the 
One  autumn  evening  some  years  afterwards  Bilbo  was  sitting  in  his  study 
"to  be orc-stuff  for you, Mr.  Frodo,  I'm afraid. And for me too. If we go "
"complete darkness fell. If  it had been difficult collecting  themselves before,  it was "
"Kirbee Whittuck,4041593984426368,31-05-1980
"
"     He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow  from the bow the gr eat "
"Allistir Dripp,4041592129169537,09-05-1984
"
"Arlee Longden,4396690143365,31-12-1995
"
"seemed, and still towering high, though their tops were gaunt and broken, as "
"Nina Losseljong,4632617730359,04-05-1994
"
so a great evil of this world will be removed. 
"speed, and  Frodo felt that he could not face the  toil of  scrambling among "
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond  said was beyond 
and  the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the  lands; and  they heard 
""
"Laura Seeds,4905305810893,27-04-1992
"
"     'I am glad to find you visible,' replied the wizard, sitting down  in a  "
out filth a  purpose; they've  fouled all  the lower Water  and it's getting 
 
"when  I  introduce  you.  I  shall  introduce  you  slowly,  two  by  two,  I  think;  and  you "
""
     'Poor wretch! ' he said half remorsefully. 'Now I wonder where he's got 
"that were aboard, and bade  them put aside fear and be free. "
"that he  knew, though spoken more richly and strongly than in the Shire, yet  "
     Pippin  looked out from  the shelter of Gandalf's cloak. He wondered if 
evilly as they might.' 
"Men  of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of Ann®minas beside "
"him;  but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Thjoden's defence,  "
will devour him.' 
"small and curious key. Here it is!"" he said, and handed to Thorin a key with a long "
"     'Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it  did not cheer  "
of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not  find him again. I 
"Sting I give to you. I have  got an orc-blade, but I do not think it will be "
"Claus Moseby,4017953907544053,13-07-1997
"
"they  swooped on  them and drove  them  shrieking back  to  their caves, and  stopped "
"     'Maybe,' said Sam;  `but  where there's life there's hope, as my Gaffer  "
"Second, for instance. "
""
standing  on a knoll and pointing to the  right. Hurrying up they saw  below 
"they were  to  do  now. The  dwarves were  grumbling,  and Gandalf was  saying  that "
"before, and had gone off that morning with Strider. "
"leaves  though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the  ground at  its "
"     'We will come,' said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous words. "
""
     Aragorn led them to  the right  arm of the River. Here upon its western 
(at  least when he  met me); and always  eager  to  listen. I told him  many 
"and a rustle, the shade of a whisper as of  many  drifting  leaves. At  last  "
when 
"Before  long  there  was  a  fluttering  of  wings,  and  back  came  the  thrush;  and "
"has no virtue that we know of, save perhaps  to sweeten a fouled air, or  to "
"Quentin Stapforth,4465468948588271,20-12-1998
"
"still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?' "
open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time  to time in a queer 
nobody was about. And that is  about all there  is  to tell. It seems almost 
     The Orcs yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you 
"something still alive in that place, something with eyes,  or a seeing mind, "
"     The  others  cast themselves down  upon the  fragrant grass,  but Frodo "
there is anything to hear or see.' 
"     'Nay,'  they said,  'not if  the Nameless One himself should come,  not "
"this, if you will, is  the  magic of Galadriel. Did  you not  say  that  you  "
"####-     'Do you indeed!'  said  Frodo. 'Well,  I am  glad he  has  dropped  the "
"Appolonia Burnard,4041590168191,10-01-1980
"
"Bobbie Coniam,4017957617468610,17-07-1977
"
"staff, gazing  into the darkness, east and  west.  All was silent, and there "
"Marieann Leyes,4240935130903213,07-09-1993
"
"     ' ""Who said you could?"" says she. "
Moon disfigured with a ghastly  face of death;  but he did not  stop to look  
"difficulties, at least since the wizard left. Whatever am I going to do? I might have "
desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible.' 
"Erie Druitt,4041374957181,31-01-1986
"
"sort of small dwarf-man, then it must be a pack of rebel Uruk -hai; or  maybe  "
"and then on for a whole mile or more. Very puffed he was, when he got to Bywater "
"Treebeard  sent  some  Ents down, and they  carried off  a great deal of the "
     Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that  he 
"branched, "
"his messengers. But he came too late, for once,  and the battle was over and "
"most matters, begging your pardon.' "
""
"neck still hurts him, yes it does. Let's go! ' "
"been wrought, or had remained for ever lost.' "
"Boromir  and listened to him, from Rivendell  all down the  road --  looking  "
"Vivie Parradye,4130648237742433,28-08-1985
"
end of their errand;  and anyway it seemed wiser to him to save the waybread 
"And he was a miserable wicked creature, and already he had a plan. "
"far  side,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never  seen "
     lord of moria.' 
     on black and roaring wa ves that ran 
through  a wood  climbing  down from the  hills  at the  feet  of the  Misty 
and fences. Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line. 
From the hills in the Eastfold of your realm I saw it rise  and creep across 
"the treasure of my people no man has a claim, because Smaug who stole it from us "
and ears. 
"Michael Corsor,4017955277702,24-03-1981
"
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.' 
"     Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming  peace,  the hearts  of all "
"""No  thank  you,  O  Smaug  the.  Tremendous!""  he  replied.  ""I  did  not  come  for "
"joys  a nd  labours in the world, or holding council, concerning  the days to "
joint or crevice to be seen. 
"by one master alone, not by many; and he will look for a time of strife, ere "
brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground. He  was out in the darkness. 
and a fit  of coughing shook him. 
"but even  as they looked,  the shadows of night melted, the  colours  of the "
come to the great barrows  where the sires of  Thjoden sleep.' 'Seven mounds 
letting his master's legs  dangle. Then he bowed his  head and struggled off 
"Rules,  and  Assaulting  Gate-keepers,  and  Trespassing,  and  Sleeping  in "
"     Bilbo got up  and bowed.  `I am  flattered, Lindir,'  he said. 'But  it "
would have to ride over him to get near the waggon. 
shadow! What has happened since we came  back to this grim place in the grey 
and  poured over the stone gangways.  Then Boromir raised his horn and blew.  
"friends behind  them and winter upon  them,  they will perhaps be  in softer mood  to "
the 
"gone away to big battle, perhaps! ' "
"fast, with a light clippety-clippely-clip. Then faintly,  as if it was blown "
"of the calendars of the Shire and Bree  to those of  Rivendell,  Gondor, and "
long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought he saw a  dark bird-like 
""
ones.' 
     They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony stood 
"of brambles,  and sheer dells;  and here and there boggy pools fed by waters "
shut themselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on 
astonishing enthusiasm. They were all doctored and fed and housed and pampered 
sometimes at a loss for a while. They had come to the very midst of the Dead 
"his guests, and especially  the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted,  feeling "
"meaning I leave to your judgement, if indeed it has any. But  old folk still "
way to the Ford.' 
""
"fell  and  mountains slid;  walls crumbled and melted,  crashing down;  vast "
and peered cautiously above one of the great roots. 
"     'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed. "
"     'They have not returned,' said Legolas. 'It will be a weary walk!' "
     `Do you advise me to look? ' asked Frodo. 
"     He  then  told  them many remarkable  stories,  sometimes  half  as  if "
shade.  Sometimes  Bilbo  saw  the  horns  of  the  harts  sticking  up  out  of  the  long 
 
yet. I will go first.' 
"     'Good,  Gimli!  '  said  Gandalf.  `You encourage me. We  will seek the "
trees  drew down to the  river's  brink. Here and there golden lea ves tossed 
""
"Killian Berresford,4041376557609,02-09-1977
"
"I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour "
thought  he heard him speaking  Gandalf's  name.  The  time  seemed  to drag 
     Dismayed  the  rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight;  but the 
come back to  this spot when  the job's done  -- if  he manages it. And then 
"pace,  and  with only one brief halt Aragorn  led the Company on  for nearly "
"Susie Cranefield,4041597925403881,21-06-1982
"
####-a heavy burden. 
this silly adventure- it's yours after all and not mine-you had better slap your arms 
returned. 
hollows  and  twined  here  and  there  about  the  peaks  and  pinnacles  of  the  hills. 
"he? says I to the Gaffer. / don't know,  says he; but he wasn't a hobbit. He "
Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of his last journey upon the Great 
might take a long while for the  influence to  wear off  - before it was safe 
"     'Thus we crossed  over Gilrain,  driving the allies  of  Mordor in rout "
"Danyelle Spiring,4735729196029,05-01-1997
"
"restored  to  him.  To  Bilbo  he  said:  ""This  treasure  is  as  much  yours  as  it  is  mine; "
"mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right through.  That sort of thing seems "
"""That will be Dain!"" said Thorin when he heard. ""They will have got wind of "
     Of him the harpers sadly sing: 
' he cried. 
"####-set  out,  either North,  South,  West  or East  -  and  the direction should "
"and  over  that  they had  to go, slow and careful, one by one, each  leading his pony "
"dead faces in the water,' he said with horror. 'Dead faces! ' "
"Martha Moring,4041374211648870,19-02-1984
"
"gleam  of  the wizard's  light, bobbing like  a will-o'-the-wisp in front of "
freely after the manner of a hobbit among friends. 
""
"waybread and made  him  ea t it. Then, too worn out even to  feel  much fear,  "
"the dusk, its red nail darkening to black. "
of wasting time trying to understand it. There was a lot here which Smaug did not 
"stating  that  on  June  the  Twenty-second  Messrs.  Grubb,  Grubb,  and  Bun-owes "
"Baxter Emby,4041599876331,27-03-1991
"
"Sauron first put on  the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the  Three, was aware of "
silver  spoons mysteriously  disappeared  and were  never  accounted  for.  Personally 
mouthful 
"but after a morsel of food and a sip of water  they went  on up  the ravine, "
were wandering. We guessed you'd come ere long down to the water:  all paths 
"     'Well,' said Gimli, 'if it  has And®ril to keep it company, my  axe may "
"sleepily;  ""perhaps  I  shall  see  them  on  the  way  home.  I  suppose  I  shall  be  going "
"of Rohan, and now she is healed.' "
flowing away east to  feed the Entwash far off in  its reed-choked beds. The 
"welcome. The  poorer hobbits, and especially  those of Bagshot Row, did very "
many Elves hidden on the northern border before another night falls. Bu t you 
"Jeanette Baudinot,4041597260967250,10-12-1994
"
"they went  on again,  walking without  hast e. At noon they halted, and Frodo  "
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world. 
"time has  come,' he said.  `If the Ring is to set out, it  must go soon. But "
didn't live in these darksome holes surely? ' 
"     'No,' said Aragorn. 'But I deem the time unripe; and I have no mind for "
for any  rumour of  the dragon's coming. Though all  the old adornments were  long 
"appealing or moving, and for  many the guide  was inevitably often at fault. "
"none  of  them  any  too  nimble,  what  with  the  dark,  and  what  with  their  long "
"never see any, hm, any Ents round  there do you?' he asked. 'Well, not Ents,  "
bidden!  Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?' Thereupon  the door  
####-shining  cold  and  bright  right  in  their  astonished  eyes.  The  ones  in  front  dropped 
mainly 
of breath and seemed rather scared. 
""
"     'Yes, there can  be no doubt,' said Aragorn. 'At last we know the link' "
"trees,  the only such place in the City. There dwelt the few women  that had "
pale light  that seemed to come from  some  remote  distance.  Then  a  grip 
"Felisha Staynes,4041596094821,23-09-1997
"
inside. 
"     'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?' she said. 'And  would "
thought. `And we might be wanting to get back. We might! ' 
reaching out  a  clutching  claw; for  these  fell creatures would bite  the 
power to strike us: for his will it is that is at work.' 
"of  the dark eyeholes Frodo  and Sam  were  always conscious,  ever glancing "
"now and again Shelob caught them to stay  her  appetite, she was welcome: he "
"     'Yes,  to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Alas! Mordor draws all wicked things,  "
"     A little  apart  the Rangers sat, silent,  in an ordered company, armed "
vapours rose in the East and crawled above them. Frodo and Sam took a little 
few orcs with mine; but Ugl®k  took them from us. How he glared! At first  I 
"into  the room,  and  began  to bow  low,  feeling  strangely surprised  and "
from an unseen roof into the water below; but there seemed no other sort of sound. 
"darkness ahead: the road to Woodhall, and  Stock, and the Bucklebury  Ferry. "
"ears,  they heard a noise  like a  wind coming  in  the distance.  The misty "
We do  not want the  escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.'  Sam  fancied that he  
"high chambers of  Orthanc. The door would be closed, and they would  be left  "
before Mr. Baggins was in fact admitted to be alive again. The people who had got 
"very old,  and as  he looked at them,  suddenly with a thrill of fear Pippin "
""
"hear is true: Tower raided and all, and hundreds of your  lads done in,  and "
"taking off to storage. They do more gathering than sharing, and we never see "
from the view of the rider came over him. 
"Lemar Camillo,4528126634167,13-03-1987
"
"Smjagol! ' There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath. "
"names beside. He is a strange creature, but maybe I should have summoned "
"Cameron Scotney,4017955516331,27-03-1998
"
"Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep  to  the Road, without some  clearer  "
"     'He  is not as other  men  of  this  time,  Pippin, and whatever be his "
"     'Yes,' said  Gandalf. `I never told him, but its worth was greater than "
"precious  lembas for the evil days ahead, they ate the half of what remained "
"hills, I think, with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of rock  in "
"alien field, the glory that you reap there shall be your own for ever. Oaths "
"Lief Wormleighton,4393978734109154,24-12-1978
"
in Hobbiton far off twinkling in  the gentle  valley of  the  Water. Soon it 
were grievously reduced. Faramir had lost a third of his men. And  where was 
"Sam,  putting in his head, `but I was just wondering if you would be wanting  "
"For a while: a month, a life,  a hundred years  of Men.  But Anduin is near, "
laboured  far into the  night. And word went through the City: 'The  King is 
him 
"""I only wish he was a raven!"" said Balin. "
"Misti Borland,4041590470015671,12-11-2000
"
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at 
"say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.' "
"Lonely Mountain, Erebor, and ruled there for a while, before his people moved on "
"near Woodhall, trying to take a short cu t to the Ferry.' "
"Gwyn Heiner,4041379297203,02-07-1976
"
he and  his successors  collected  many manuscripts written  by  scribes  of 
"A  hole  appeared  suddenly  about  three  feet  from  the  ground.  Quickly,  trembling "
answered Beregond. 'But I  do  not  know the  counsel of  the  Lord  and his 
"something, that's  plain,  and more  than  I like; but it's no reason why we "
"eat, and however busily  they delved new winding passages from  the pass and "
"####-     'Well, Mr. Frodo, we've been far and seen a deal, and yet I don't think  "
could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.  
Orcs may already be on this side of the water.' 
"Vassili Carlton,4041594350390758,30-12-2000
"
round a bend and up a winding tunnel. 
"quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping "
advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. 'And I am still in 
looked 
"fingering them. Fili and Kili were almost in merry mood, and finding still hanging "
with eyes shining in the dark. 
"up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes,' "
Company from Moria to Rauros.' 
"There was nearly two hundred of them, all holding some weapon. "
him  bad  bargain-prices  (as between  friends)  for  various  valuable  and 
"Silvano Murtimer,4017957897861,03-09-1981
"
"Harmonia Haseman,4017956270714,29-06-1984
"
"had been sent out ten days before, and he brought tidings of Ithilien and of "
Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.' 
""
"     `No! '  said  Gollum, and then he squealed, as if something had stabbed "
####-     'That is right!' said the old man.  'Now  is the time for resting. Some 
to  carry  but  strong  to  bring  them  over  the  mountain  passes.  Their  plans  were 
"Darrell Esherwood,4041599294366392,05-12-1987
"
"Humfrey Dunston,4017957627396991,26-05-1989
"
"Darrelle Joontjes,4041597065229427,31-08-1987
"
     About him cast her shadowy hair 
"     'I  said not Jomer,'  answered Hbma. 'And he is not the  last. There is "
his very feet the  Great River curled  like a toppling wave and plunged over 
"the next day would  be a day of doom, the day  of final  effort or disaster, "
"Melissa Wylam,4041372053140,03-09-1995
"
"was his friend, for my part.' "
"more of war, but only of hiding and of crawling, and of death. "
myself.  Your new motto's always ready to help . Could you find anything  fit 
"Their  Captain remained  in secret away  south of Bree, while two rode ahead "
him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.' 
"     'I  should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and  were a  "
"The path was now plain before  them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It "
contribute  to  the  aid  of  Esgaroth;  but  if  Thorin  would  have  the  friendship  and 
watchmen were going to their meal. 
"Is taller than trees, "
"along, down the hard cruel road that led to the Dark Tower itself. But their "
and passages. The wildest imaginings  that dark rumour had ever suggested to 
"     Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor  finished speaking. 'I  "
"devilry, none could see.  All day the labour  went forward, while the men of "
the spoons.  
opportunity  has  been  taken  of  revising  it.  A  number  of  errors  and 
against the Power that has  now arisen there is no victory. I do not bid you  
"now the company came  suddenly  into a great empty space, and there  were no "
"'Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen the Hills of "
"Thjoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by  it and learn of its power? That is "
"to lift  his  master alone, and beyond that he had expected to share in  the "
we shall have to try. See -- the rock is quite different from  what it was a  
"home soon?"" "
"they had brought from the trolls' lair, and he said: ""These are not troll-make. They "
"River  Running,  and  now  they  could  all  see  the  Lonely  Mountain  towering  grim "
"Khazad-dym  for many  lives of kings, save Thrur only, and  he  perished. At "
"good while;  but  I'll come and see you again, as soon  as I  can. Expect me "
Their  glittering  mail  they  had  covered  again  with  their  old  cloaks  and  their 
"Garek Tue,4041371627190042,16-01-1997
"
"there stretched a wide region of fuming, barren, ash-ridden land. "
"(which  annoyed  Bilbo  very much),  they  all  got  up.  The  hobbit  had  to  find  room "
"the stream toward them, they saw a  swan of great size. The water rippled on  "
"ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that "
into evil. I will go alone. At once.' 
"are pleasant enough, but, well - this  isn't the Shire. There are queer folk  "
"that even Elrond should have found this out first, though really there had not been "
"eastward. From  that  direction there  now came hoarse cries, and  there was "
"     `You ought  at  least to guess,  since you have seen  us,' said  Merry. "
"     And yet at last they met once more, "
"Rosalinde Jefferson,4017954741013,01-04-1999
"
played  its part. Yet we that  remain cannot forsake our companions while we 
"counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go  straight on, for  thus you will "
"####-But now  all the land was empty, and there was silence  that did not seem to  "
"     'The meaning of it, fair people,'  said Frodo, 'is simply that  we seem "
"open it, not though they all pushed while Gandalf tried various incantations. "
tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is now  to us so far away 
"one another,  and  dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let  them wait on "
"     'As  for what I wished to say, I  have said it: What  may you be doing, "
     On all the level spaces there was great concourse of men. Some thronged 
"Tonya Heggie,4119468881679525,16-11-1994
"
few  steps  running  down  into  a  narrow  valley  between  tall  mountains;  the  sun 
there black and dark lay boulders stark 
"     `Yet all  the Elves are willing to endure this chance,' said Glorfindel "
"patience  to speak  to you.  For I need  you not, nor  your  little band  of "
"round them it seemed, and  they felt a fine rain  on their hands and cheeks. "
"they  never  found  him  out.  He  just  throttled  them  from  behind,  if  they  ever  came "
""
he whispered and spluttered. 
"     'We usually  lie down to  sleep,' said Merry.  'We  shall  be all right "
"""What  voice  is  it  that  speaks  among  the  stones?""  said  the  man  halting  and "
sound to a  hoarse  whisper  that all could hear: `In the deep places of the 
smile.  `So that  is the answer  to all the riddles! The One Ring  that  was 
chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the stone; and it must once 
"they  heard  the hue and cry begin. Away  behind them, now high above on the "
"hurryings  in  the undergrowth, and among  the  leaves  that  lay piled endlessly  thick "
"Lamond Lorking,4041595404377,23-10-1980
"
haste from long afar.' 
Rivendell  by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he 
####-and more fell than all  others.  
the Dark Lord more clearly shown  than in the estrangement that  divides all  
     He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his fifty-second 
or in the service of the healers.  
"country. And Gandalf, too, was now  riding on his tall grey  horse, all clad "
"     'Yes.' said  Legolas.  `It is an eagle, a hunting  eagle. I wonder what "
"country  of  Hollin in many seasons. No folk  dwell here now, but many other  "
"Eduino Maudsley,4041590324513,01-12-1995
"
"that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before "
     Then  he heard a noise in the distance.  At first he thought  it  was a  
them did not seem very alarming to him. 
""
to the  Sons of Eorl  in this evil tide.  There  is battle even  now upon the 
strange. He was very pale and his eyes seemed to see things far away. 
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life. 
"""In what way have I earned such a gift, O hobbit?"" said the king. "
     'They  can go twenty miles north to Brandywine  Bridge - or they  might 
""
"     For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling  spring, and "
"Donica Schrinel,4017955533150759,18-07-1996
"
shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.' 
so they might be said to have had the best of it so far.  
notes in an endless changeful music. 
"reigned,  broken  by  no  bird  or  sound  except  that  of  the  wind  in  the  crannies  of "
suddenly he drew  himself up.  His  hands  worked. His eyes glittered.  Such 
 
before of Orcs  upon Amon Hen. Yet who  knows what may happen in  these 
Morgul. 
""
in.' 
"be assailed, and if  they  might take  it,  it should  be utterly destroyed. "
Aragorn led them  on a trial up  the Silverlode. The current  was  swift and 
"Shaw Sudran,4017954375803310,23-08-2001
"
"stood  empty.  Then Sauron returned. Now  the watch-towers, which  had fallen "
head into the cold water and splashed his neck and ears.  
"Doretta Lote,4041379607359198,31-03-1976
"
drawn to its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of 
went on for a long while: 
"     But music turns her head like ale, "
Riders  that  were still in  the midst of  the  Ford were  overwhelmed: they 
"     'I owe much to  Jomer,' said Thjoden. 'Faithful heart  may have forward "
"flowed through the middle  of  the lake. They  ate  some food, and then they "
"way, back towards  Anduin. Now  we  must ride slower, and make sure  that no "
to carry.  In  the first marches they  went  further and faster than he  had 
"and here he lies with poison in his veins. Nay, nay, whatever may now betide "
""
"come the wrong way altogether, seemingly. We can't get down;  and if  we did "
"     'At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And  then his "
cured meat; and they sipped some water. They  had drunk again from the pools 
"but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low "
"     'The answer to the  second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could get "
made revel  together in  the fields of Gondor. And tidings now came by swift 
"sides  were now dark  and sullen, and  its head  was in  grey  cloud.  Frodo "
"Rosamond Chesley,4017957320568573,27-01-1978
"
     and the City shall be blessed. 
"Bernadina Keme,4041594572893,29-10-1975
"
"danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he  would have  bidden you not to slay "
"     'I, I  took  the  ball  and looked at it,' stammered Pippin; 'and I saw "
that creaked faintly as the boughs  moved. The leaves fluttering against the 
"Eduardo Muir,4017959237857081,01-03-2001
"
"     Turning to  the others he said:  'While I  am  searching, will you each "
"feeling came  over  them,  as  if the air were  too thin or too  scanty  for  "
"Before them the  mountains frowned, but  their path lay in a deep  trough of "
all  who  hold  with me. The East-mark is my charge. the  ward  of  the Third 
"more about them."" "
     They also keep a horned cow 
behind them at whiles great smokes would arise and hover in the upper winds.  
voice of Beregond. 
"####-clashed  the  shafts  against  their  shields.  Goblins  are  not  afraid  of  fire,  and  they "
"stand  here! The hobbit, Peregrin,  above  all should not know  where it  is "
"their own, and  their speech is sundered  from their northern  kin.' Then he "
"them nearly as much. Tie one end to his  ankle, and keep a grip on the other  "
"great fierce bees, and  lives most on cream and honey. As a bear he ranges far and "
"believe me. Well, if that's over, I'll have a bit of sleep.' "
""
"swam out again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger and bigger from trying to "
"broken  even in  defeat,' she said. `But is there aught else that you desire "
"fools, I  will  get ahead of them and  teach  them  a  lesson.  One ill turn "
"     The  hills drew nearer.  They  made an  undulating  ridge, often rising "
your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?' 
"Lynn Aleksandrev,4337471561001933,07-07-1985
"
effort.' 
put a spell upon us! Shoot first!' 
"and  sighing.  Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark  wings "
"     In three days, as the King had said, Jomer  of Rohan came riding to the "
"     ' ""No you won't,"" I said.  ""You'll  go back  where you  belong,  double "
"Hollin to the  mountain -pass.  The  Moon, now  at the  full,  rose  over the "
"slowly one behind the other, till at last in the late afternoon they came to the top of "
"Ladyship,  all  we  want is  light  and  water:  just clean water and  plain "
come true!' And then he wept. 
"     Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing:  "
knew  that all the hazards and perils were now  drawing together to a point: 
"Weariness fell from him soon in that house, and he had many a merry jest and "
and slender like  a sunlit flower  against the  sky: she  was standing still 
"Corabella Bau,4017954892618,23-04-1982
"
"fluttered away; and  it laughed a little within him ere it fled, almost  gay "
"Twila Decker,4788057538221,03-05-1996
"
am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.' 
     'Where is Entmoot?' Pippin ventured to ask. 
     To Legolas she sent this word: 
"""Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched little hobbit on a treasure hunt!"" said "
"     Pippin was  roused by Gandalf. Candles  were lit in their chamber,  for  "
uneasy.  Thin and  stretched  he  said. A  sign  that  the  ring was getting 
the City; but I have had no  time to gather news. I must go.  Pippin. I must  
"bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why?  For if his legs were tied, how did "
way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.' 
     'Jumped over  the Moon!'  chuckled  Merry as he rolled himself  in  his 
"""I'll  soon  put  an  end  to  that,""  hissed  the  angry  spider  climbing  back  onto  the "
"Tammi Bramhall,4017955022586638,28-04-2000
"
     Amroth beheld the fading shore 
"all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They  had climbed on to  a  "
did not open it. 
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots 
"     'Not long, my sister,' said Jomer. 'But think no more on it!' "
to full years  and ended in  honour no  less than the greatest of his sires.  
"Isacco Wickins,4041590985415937,21-09-1978
"
It  was.  A  bitter  easterly  breeze  blew  with  a  threat  of  oncoming  winter.  It 
"behind this  great ridge. There seems to be a smoke or haze over there, left "
"     'I see,' said Frodo: 'you want to get married, and yet you want to live "
door or empty window.  
"and he says take care; and  I say  yes to that, and let's begin with him. He "
     'But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea -crafty men of the Ethir  
"the dark  globe from the hobbit,  wrapping it in the folds of his cloak.  'I  "
"famished skeleton of some child of Men, its ragged garment still clinging to  "
"shuddered, but  Dbin said: ""I say neither yea nor  nay. I must consider this "
"away. If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.' "
"the  song was a rain-song, as sweet as  showers on dry hills,  that told the "
and  spoke words of welcome in  his elven-tongue.  Frodo  spoke haltingly in 
"""P'raps  there  are more  like  him  round  about,  and we might make  a  pie,""  said "
with your acrobatics!' 
"Siobhan Cressy,4017956987952,12-06-1989
"
"here, lord,' he  said, 'an errand-rider of Gondor. He wishes to come  before "
""
"fleeting on a  chill wind, when  they  arose again. Under the cold moon they "
hundreds of other men  with spare  horses lightly burdened. A single trumpet 
beasts in terror?' 
south; and then they would  be  still five leagu es westward of  the accursed 
"the thrush's stone, the snail-covered walls, the narrow ledge, and all disappeared in "
All is  dark now  and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my 
"Dulcea Rickeard,4041597819723634,01-10-1997
"
those who still oppose him.  Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in 
"watchers that can endure this storm, then they  can see us, fire or no.' But "
"Man Round,4417679873131197,04-02-1996
"
embrasure in  the walls with a stone seat beneath the sill. From there  they 
further on there is a place  where we can rest for a little. There I will do 
"Pelennor and saw again the white  towers  under tall Mindolluin, the City of "
"     Down on  the Road, where it swept to the right to  go round the foot of "
"Bess Grinyakin,4136348664390,22-11-1976
"
"Bary Minghetti,4017952081743,03-04-1994
"
     'I  have  indeed!  ' said Sam. 'And I reckon  there's  Elves and Elves.  
"     'Yes,'  said Pippin,  'very: tired out with idleness and waiting. I have "
"     They were clad in warm  raiment and heavy cloaks, and over all the Lady  "
"Paola Canniffe,4659404749292,20-05-1980
"
     'And what may that be?' said Frodo quietly. 
     from nether heats and burning waste  
"merely to  watch  you,  as  long  a s  daylight  lasts,  and  don't  do much. "
"     'But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how  this thing "
"about him: it seemed as if  the  sun had been  shining, but now was  hid  in "
     'You  be  careful  of yourself. Maggot!' she called. 'Don't  go arguing 
to go off in a qu ite unexpected direction.' 
less hopeful of catching this one napping. 
"might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White, but something always held "
""
"     'Perhaps,' said  Strider. 'For myself, I believe that he was  here, and "
Underhill?  What are  all  these  queer goings on? What are these black   men 
laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable  tongue. 'Rest  
faces 
"needed  rest.  Ponies  take  some  catching,  I  believe,  after  a  long  start.  And  so  do "
"     ""Then we  must be more careful,' said Gandalf.  'If you bring a  Ranger  "
"     'Too  warm, I  shouldn't  wonder,'  muttered  Sam  to  Frodo. 'But  I'm "
"Zachary Polack,4963952898285944,13-05-1992
"
"oars. Reckless  we rode among  our fleeing foes,  driving them  like leaves,  "
"Meara Iron,4041374468227907,02-02-1992
"
     In the gloom they heard  the hiss  of  Wormtongue's voice:  'Did I  not 
"     'Yes,'  said Pippin; 'I'm  afraid this is only a passing  gleam, and it "
"butterflies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his "
nothing. We hates Bagginses.' 
"Raynell Snodin,4602416100914,15-04-1997
"
among hobbits!' 
long  time  ago when  he first told me about  himself. I almost wish that my 
staring  eyes were aware of a dim light at  his right hand. It came  from an 
"fissh: Makes  us  strong.  Makes eyes bright,  fingers  tight, yes. Throttle "
"farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them.' "
""
forgotten Treebeard.' 
"     'I wonder who made this path, and what for,' said Merry, as they walked "
household of Elrond I saw that he was not come.' 
"tall towers,  and one they raised was silver -white,  and in it there  was  a  "
bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes 
     The sun on the hill-lop was now  getting  hot. It must  have been a bout 
don't see many of the Big Folk over the border; and anywa y I had never heard 
"his  stout  legs apart,  wielding  his  dwarf-axe.  The  bow of  Legolas was "
to understand their thought.' 
"including  a  jolly  sturdy  little  white  fellow  that  Elrond  had  lent  to  Gandalf,  since "
"     Galdor of the Havens, who sat near by, overheard him. `You speak for me "
the boat eastward towards the far shore. 
"the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are called. Awake!' "
can  when  I'm  not  looking-for  them?  And  you  will  get  a  fair  share?  Don't  you 
"     'You have passed my  score  by  one,' answered Legolas. 'But  I  do not  "
"and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I  don't believe them. "
"Bilbo was  dreadfully  frightened,  but  he  had  the  sense  to  understand what  had "
"     Hail, corners from afar!' they said, and they turned the hilts of their "
"which is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some of  our "
"Roi Pomery,4459750987084124,07-11-1994
"
"against many. There we may lie up and rest for  a while, and you with us. In "
     Gollum returned quietly  and  peered over  Sam's  shoulder.  Looking at 
"allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.' "
"was in them, as in most of his foods, and they were good to eat, though they made "
"through, and I came out again alive! ' "
had passed  the Cross-roads and  set  flames  in  the deadly fields of Imlad 
"     A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur branched "
####- 
"Lefty Moverley,4017951199397,25-02-1988
"
the Road crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred 
"the  House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in  the morning.' said  a voice. "
least  that's my idea. And I hope  the master will  think it  out carefully. 
"Dirk Whatley,4041596976589,25-10-1989
"
     'Is it the custom  in  your land to wash the head before supper? ' said 
""
before it. It was gone. 
And  that's  the to-do. They're raising the Shire. We're going to clear  out 
"heard voices, just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was "
"there was a merry racket down by the river. They were making up a raft of barrels, "
sires; but  for  you in  all  the lands of the  West  there will  ever  be a  
     `And then where are we to go? ' asked Frodo. 
"     'Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly,' said  Thjoden. 'And our scouts  say "
"crow. The only sound was  the sound of  the stony water, and every now and again "
"Lhaw. There  they found a shelving shore, and they  drew the  boat out, high "
"     Gimli walked with Legolas. his axe on his  shoulder. 'Well, at last  we "
"     'I'll never  get him there,' thought  Pippin. 'Is there  no one to help "
"Pippin have been fortunate: they  met  him here, even where  we sit. For  he  "
the  last  time  fell  to  thinking  of  his  far-distant  hobbit-hole  with  its  beautiful 
"part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo  on the pony. In "
"quest? Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back aga in; but I go to lose "
"Marne Basilotta,4041371345260507,11-09-1991
"
 
strange too is your raiment.  Have you sprung out of the  grass? How did you 
"until six-thirty, when the fireworks  started. "
"fingers,  and it gave out  a  sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It  is fortunate "
"     'If there  are no worse things ahead  than  the Old Forest, I  shall be "
"     Then they went  round the hole,  and  evicted three  young hobbits (two "
there  be  any  such  league  of  Elves  and  Men; for  Men  multiply and the 
hidden  doors together.  And  we will come  through.  In  the  ruins of  the 
prove the  worst. I let the matter be. I let  him go; for I had much else to 
they  wished  lo  take. After some  discussion  they decided to  leave  this 
"draws near that  I have looked for in all the years of my manhood,  and when "
"Giulietta Colloff,4836550417227,26-11-2001
"
"you sooner  than you expected, and now you are  making up your mind to go at "
"Naught  worse than that, eh? That  can soon  be mended. I know the  tune for "
that scored  the land and thr ew them in. The clatter of his precious pans as 
name of thief that was put on me. But  perhaps I understand things a  little 
     'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo. 
""
"Patricia Guerriero,4017955680814389,23-12-1996
"
"Benoite Dudley,4041597632835,18-01-1989
"
ever did a trick like that! ' 
you want to?' 
"Pietrek Sharpous,4017957869282,07-05-1994
"
"     'There is  the water,' said Merry. 'But Quickbeam and  some  others are "
looking u p like some startled  woodland  animal snuffling  a  strange air. A 
"     'It's going  to be thick,' said Maggot; 'but  I'll not light my lantern "
"the fording  of  the  Greyflood. After that  journey,  and  the road  I have "
"gap in the history, required some  thought. I may have  started with guesses "
"""Booby yerself!"" said Tom. "
grey 
"swerved  aside in the nick of time,  passing only  a few yards away, rocking  "
"     'Where are we, Gandalf?' he asked. "
of the walls and passes the gate. Nothing moves on the  road that they don't  
     Out of the turret-door the  smaller  orc came flying.  Behind  him came 
"     That night the Company slept upon the ground, much  to the satisfaction "
ground  was  busy  with folk  going  to and  fro; a  wide  road  ran from it 
going to? In fact I should like to know all about you. Not that it willdo you much 
"does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?' "
"Sure  enough  the  old  thrush was  there,  and  as  Bilbo  pointed,  he  flew  towards "
     Flapping big ears. 
before.  The dark line they had seen was  not  a line of trees but a line of 
but he roused  himself with an effort and sat up. Something warned him to be 
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you  
"####-     No trouble by day, nor  any sound by night, disturbed the peace of Bree "
"Perceval Heugle,4648161307004648,27-09-1988
"
"unexpected talent  for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many "
and 
"last  strongholds  of  the  mighty  woods of the  Elder Days, in  which  the  "
"Ame Nono,4017957043549322,02-03-1993
"
"rumours before, of course; but  hobbits have a passion  for  family history, "
and not windy. Trees are not very comfortable to sit in for long at any time; but in 
"finger. So it was that  Gollum passed him  without seeing him, and  went  to  "
"not meddle  in  the  affairs  o f Wizards, for they  are subtle  and quick to  "
"All  of  a  sudden Dwalin  opened  an  eye,  and  looked  round  at  them.  ""Where  is "
     'It is much to me. But I know already  sufficient of these deeds for my 
"Antonia Gebby,4017950964674229,27-05-1999
"
"people, was on  the  right track.  The  opening word  was  inscribed on  the "
Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.' 
loosened;  but his  fingers still gripped the sword-hand. Sam  tore  himself 
"where are hi kin  that dare  seek  revenge? Girion Lord of Dale  is dead, and  I have "
"but after the manner of older days, and then changing to another language of "
"of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden "
"once more,' said Frodo. 'I  should like nothing better than  to stay in your "
"creature, this Smjagol, under your protection? ' "
"must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that  the Stone was in  Orthanc  -- "
"any of my stuff behind, and we can't destroy it.  And  I can't wear orc-mail "
####-come. The mouth  of the gully was a black notch in the  dim cliff. `I'm glad 
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed  at once. 
     'Hush!' whispered Strider.  'What's  that?' gasped Pippin at  the  same 
on: 
of song. 
####-gate.' 
"Tabbatha Scally,4017959347204,23-10-1980
"
"me a  rest, it will help. When you're down, I'll follow. I feel quite myself "
"tottered, and fell down; the mighty rampart  crumbled;  the Black  Gate  was "
"     Then Jomer was  silent, and looked on  his sister, as if pondering anew "
"won't go another day like that, if he moves at all. And you can't go on much  "
"     with mortal and immortal folk, "
turning?  ' 
"hall, and food for hungry guests,' said an Elf standing before him. "
nose. and the puff of smoke. 
"jogged  up  and down, over passes, and through long dales,  and  across many "
"glimpse was gone. The Sun dipped and vanished, and  as if at the  shuttering "
"     'That sounds  like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming,' said Pippin. 'Or is it "
     They  parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel.  It seemed  a  
"join his  friends,  ""Gandalf  spoke  true,  as usual. A pretty  fine burglar you make,  it "
"Crin Collington,4687189506525693,18-03-1999
"
"west  when  they  started,  and  till  evening  it  lay  golden  on  the  land  about  them.  It "
why  he should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards Mirkwood where 
"ready, and their horses were fidgeting;  he wished they would start arid get "
"Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things, "
     'It was sheer accident!' interrupted Frodo. 
"unpacked  and  unsaddled.  As  they  passed  under  the  arch,  it was  good  to  hear  the "
decided what to do?' 
"     'It  was  my  lot  to  take the Road,  and  I  came to  the  Bridge  of "
stronger; though they could not tell whether a  dreadful morning were indeed 
rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in. 
"####-had  a  queer  feeling  that  he  was  waiting  for  something.  ""Perhaps  the  wizard  will "
"west, over my  fields, if you please.  ""Have you seen Baggins?"" he asked in a  "
"bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?' "
fell  behind him in the shadows of the house; and  Denethor stepped backward 
"and  the  Baggins  was  daily  getting  stronger.  ""I  wish  now  only  to  be  in  my  own "
"     For Isildur's Bane shall waken, "
"forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you may not see them.' "
occupied  mostly  with his  master hardly  noticing the  dark cloud that had 
"where  they  smashed among  the  trees  far below, or  splintered  into  little bits with a "
"found out if you were busy. I will give a call, if I may."" "
""
     'Twenty-one!' said Gimli. 
"across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke. "
was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march downhill. Black specks 
"     Soon the light became  unmistakable,  and could be  seen by all. It was "
"stared at the fire and did not speak. 'You would have been,  too, if you had "
"was a Nazgyl, one of  the Nine, who ride now upon winged  steeds. Soon their "
"clearer  and  stronger. 'I saw a  dark sky, and tall battlements,' he  said. "
ther e  was anything in  this little  land  that would stand up to  twenty of 
"shadowless; there was  a great stillness. No shape  of cloud could be  seen, "
"Vittoria Craik,4726436196667225,15-12-1993
"
everything else but the red fury in his brain and the desire to kill Gollum. 
 
"write a  book,  and  had  had  many ears, he  would  have learned enough for  "
"naught to fear  from us,  until your errand is done. But unless  your master  "
"lashings  of  his  huge  tail,  till  their  little  lofty  camping ground,  the  scorched grass, "
him 
marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind was 
"between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt  "
"thought to  his adventures,   he remembered the gift of Galadriel. He brought  "
"must  talk a while more, and  think about the  morning.  Tom  must teach the  "
"the end,' he said: 'the great battle of our time, in which many things shall "
"but its touch was clean, and  as he went on and it  mounted to his knees, he "
"it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a wide  berth,  and "
"in  a soft voice, 'it has gone beyond our reach. Of that at least let  us be "
round the house and shaking it; and far off  he heard a horn blowing wildly.  
breathe properly.' 
"deceived-for  all  those arts and  subtle devices, for which  he forsook his "
"sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb. "
"lurking down there, down at the very roots of the mountain. They had come on the "
"Woodhall. 'That is the way for us,' said Frodo. "
"glazed brown clay or turned box-wood, smooth and clean. Here and there was a  "
"hands and long legs; some  the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch, "
me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for thought. 
"weapon that  you bear; be it only a  staff, you must leave on the threshold. "
     'No!' said the  voice.  `Not nice Master. Leaves  poor Smjagol and goes 
"for the grass was thick and  tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the  trees "
""
"     'Good-bye, for the present,  Bilbo. Take  care of yourself! You are old "
Long  days  after  they  had  climbed  out  of  the  valley  and  left  the  Last  Homely 
steep crumbling bank. A deep dim valley lay before them. On its further side 
"wept long: some standing and silent, some  cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. "
"the Bridge and the  East Road  near the  borders  will certainly be watched, "
'I knew nothing  of this letter.  For  all I knew I  had  to persuade you to 
O! tril-lil-lil-lolly 
within a day's march  of foes that would  freeze his heart or lay his little 
of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too  is heavy. May  I  stay now 
come.' 
his  own small  room.  Then Bilbo would  read  passages from his book (which 
"floated heavy and slow in the dark like a monstrous crow, down the wind towards "
this trip.' 
full count of it  no tale has told. So long afterward a maker in Rohan  said 
"     'Turn your face from the  green world, and look where all seems  barren "
they never came to Rivendell. 
"over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down  on top  of him. Frodo "
"     To the east the outflung arm of  the mountains marched to a sudden end, "
midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western  watch-tower.  
Farmer Maggot's land. That's his farm away there in the trees.' 
time.  He could  wait till he  was  caught and  brought before me. I sent my 
"will  give  you  time  to  repent  your  words.  Gather  your  wisdom  ere  we  return!"" "
     The hobbits of the villages  had  seen Saruman  come out of one  of the 
"citadel, and so  to a door in the north side of the great tower. There  they "
""
"guess,  and  a  deal  more  than  he  has  any  idea  of  himself.  You  may  (possibly)  all "
"Marquita Markie,4041594446784501,17-07-1992
"
"they are; so just, so very just.' "
"Wondering, the dwarves saw that among them were both Bard and the Elvenking, "
""
"     They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward edge. "
"gathered  together and  healed  of  wounds  and  weariness, to  assault  the "
"""The  Arkenstone!  The  Arkenstone!""  murmured  Thorin  in  the  dark,  half "
hurrying. 
wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and yet  you 
"the borders of the road: The moon was now three nights from the full, but it  "
"dark  land. Before them in the West the world lay still, formless  and grey; "
"and  practice,  and  a  close  friendship  with  the  earth,  have  rendered "
"Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall! "
"""Then  you  had  better  come  inside  and  tell  me  some  of  it,  if  it  won't  take  all "
"already,  which  were  hardly  in  the  original  bargain,  so  that  I  am,  I  think,  already "
"Than gems without measure, "
has  inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They  will not give way now 
doors were shut. He must have fallen  stunned when he hurled himself against  
"beats me  - and  the drink  runnin'  short, what's more,"" he  said  jogging the elbow of "
"for a long time now, of course,' he said a little wistfully. "
"Bagginses  had  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  The  Hill  for  time  out  of mind,  and "
"tired.  We have been taking things easy.  We were wet, cold and hungry,  but "
whose boughs upheld  the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems 
"####-     Gandalf paced the floor. 'The  morning  of two days ago,  nigh on three "
     'So it came to  pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward  (and my 
""
"     A sword rang as it was drawn. 'Do what you will; but  I will hinder it, "
down by his master. 
torch: a horrible sight. 
"Sam had  long  ago  made up his mind  that,  though boats were maybe  not as "
"was neither bush nor tree, and only broken and blackened stumps to speak of ones "
""
"we  go, at your own  choosing. You  have only to name aught  that is mine. I "
perhaps more.' 
"but I don't want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called for when all is "
""
""
     a jig that would wake the dead: 
light  on  the  valley-side across the water. Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered 
"Nathanael Purdon,4041372066583127,24-12-1989
"
"####-     'I  did,  sir.  And that's why I choked:  which  you heard seemingly. I "
them. 
"me.  They had divided their  forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern "
horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?' 
     'That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I had 
with a wall of new-hewn stone. 
right down to the skin. In the meanwhile his friends did their best to cheer him up; 
"     when pools are black and trees are bare, "
<br>
"     'The  wind's in  the West,' said Sam. 'If  we get to the other  side of "
"     `There's something that might be  useful,' he said. 'He's dead: the one "
there is an army still unfought upon our northern flank.' 
"     'Yes, lord,' said Jowyn. 'And he has passed into the shadows from which "
"towards  me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible -- no, no! I can't  "
as once shone  in Khazad-dym; and when  we  wished  we  would drive away 
 
"brings you here, and if you will not tell me now, I will keep you all in prison until "
weary  as  they  were only  Sam found that  easy to  do. Hobbits do not like 
and 
"peaks were shining:  Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras. the Mountains of Moria. "
"when we  are  safe  on  the  other  side  he  can  hook  it  on,  and  you  can draw  the boat "
"####-held out the sword which Thorin had worn, the sword which came from the Trolls' "
their way through the dead land. They had not gone far before they felt once 
"tired. A spasm of pain seemed to twist him, and he turned away, peering back "
"hold  you or to  give you leave, as they  will. You cannot cross the  rivers "
there were  willow-trees close  to  the  house; and  then suddenly he  had a  
"     'Nevertheless  to Isengard I go,' said Gandalf. 'I shall not stay there "
""
against a destroyer who would devour all; but I do not love the bright sword 
"Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.' "
"Kaycee Vasovic,4459899340370,16-06-1982
"
got that into your head yet?' 
"slopes  of  the  hill   were  continued  far  down  under  the  trees,  like "
"     'Then I beg leave to depart soon,' said Frodo. "
     Tom's country ends here: he will not pass the borders. 
"     'No, he will not!' said  Frodo. 'I  shall  not ride him, if I am to  be "
you don't want me to deal with them!' 
""
best  dress up Mordor -fashion;  and anyway there isn't no choice. It'll have 
"     'Water, water!'  muttered  Sam.  He had  stinted  himself,  and in  his "
further away from the highways and out of the range of torch-light. 
"them  a  deep and narrow channel. It was  empty and  silent,  and  hardly  a  "
 
"     `Need we think about it yet?' said Sam, `Surely we're not going to move "
the  perils they  would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps 
"the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, were no  better than  tramps, ready  to  "
"Darla Brands,4078104144363792,13-08-1991
"
"     'Take this,  dear lord!'  said  a  clear  voice.  'It  was ever at your "
"Still, I am very glad  someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what "
"them, if we stick together.' "
"But, funny little birds, they had no wings! "
"Garrott Cardoo,4017958364804,05-04-1996
"
"     Then the prince seeing her beauty, though her face  was pale  and cold, "
"""Undoubtedly  that  was  what  brought  the  dragon.  Dragons  steal  gold  and "
own feet; but  you  will  need  more than one  companion in  your  dangerous 
 
"whip a second time, but the blow never fell. "
Chief.' 
little' -- his skinny arm waved north and  east -- `and you can come on hard 
between the mountains and the Great River. 
"Devonna Elvins,4041591313770,16-02-2001
"
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence. 
"     Then,  whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten  power of Westernesse, "
"the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in  his older and lesser dwelling in  "
"along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night fell dark about them. "
burglar doing for us? 
"silence. Maybe it was  the Ring that called  to the  Wraith-lord, and for  a  "
fingering the golden ring   in his pocket:  his magic ring that he  had  kept 
     The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping  
"to another;  and ever  they  strive now  in thought,  but whereas the  light "
"Bessie Bailles,4733995371004,01-06-1994
"
"mines  and  gold  and  troubles  with  the  goblins,  and  the  depredations  of  dragons, "
"for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman's "
"dusk. There will be a bit of moon,  if  it keeps fine, and  that  is  lucky. Not  that  they "
"said), but he had never heard a sound. "
"I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.' "
Boromir and honoured by  the Lord Denethor; and they thanked him for  
"Cozmo Rouchy,4041373472109,29-12-1989
"
"suspect, originally brought  over  Sea by the Men  of  Westernesse. It grows "
it is known  I was going. Also Gildor advised me  not to wait. But I  should 
"on the top of the  cairn; it was flatter than the others, and  whiter, as if "
all  I've   heard;  and  don't  forget  their  horses!   They  can  see  the 
"copper, and bronze; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments. He "
"virtue in these sheaths or  because of the spell  that lay on the mound, the "
"and golden is the  roof, and its  pillars are of silver, for the bark of the "
"     'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo.  'Simply  afraid. But I am glad  to have "
"Osbourn Gilchrist,4041598790310573,27-07-2001
"
""
"Oralle Kindleysides,4041593953821,17-05-1991
"
when  they  started  off  once  more.  Before  long  the  barrels  broke  free  again  and 
Lugdush.' 
####-He woke  up  suddenly  and  sat  up  scratching  his  head. He  could  not make  out 
     'What a  pity!' said  Bilbo. 'I should have liked to see  it again. But 
I promised Jomer that my sword and his should be drawn together.' 
     They rode back to the middle of the village. There Sam turned aside and 
 
"untrusty  as a  doorward, let him  become an errand -runner. The guilty shall  "
above. Twice he paced across the floor. 
"Roslyn Kassel,4041597528102005,04-04-2001
"
hall had been cut  in the side of the hill. On either hand the  walls sloped 
"cried, standing up, holding out  a trembling hand. `Give it  me at once! You  "
"Hersch Whiting,4041372885038,28-11-1999
"
     In the wintry woodland wavering. 
now?  ' 
looking in their eyes. 
"dealing  with  the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Gluin! Maybe you will see "
"come here who wish for peace,  and thought. There is always a fire here, all  "
them grasping a hay-fork. 
"have had I leave to you.  And also you  have Rose, and Elanor; and Frodo -lad "
"not  to  slay you or to bind  you. But it is a command that no stranger, not "
"""Well!  that  has  got  us  on  a  bit,""  said  Gandalf;  ""and  even  goblins  tracking  us "
sent him  to follow  Merry and Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam 
followed it far before they became aware that it was bending steadily to the 
"     'But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on  his own,' growled Sam.  "
"     `Quite  right,'  answered  the dwarf,  gathering up  the  cushions  and "
"Doy Davydychev,4017957579479324,23-10-1977
"
"     ""Then  about  a  year  ago  a  messenger came  to Dbin,  but  not  from "
"forwards, and slapped his feet on the floor, and wriggled and squirmed; but still he "
"name.  Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we  have come,  though  many "
my duty at the gate. Farewell! And  may the Lord  of the Mark be gracious to 
"     'Well, that's a warning to  us all!' laughed Merry. 'It  is as well you  "
     The doors rolled  back  and a keen air  came whistling in.  A wind  was 
"     'Yes. The obvious thing to do, of  course, if  one  could. I tried long "
     'It is  called Cirith Ungol.' Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering 
"""You are,"" said Bert. "
making for; and then he had still to find the doors. 
"decided,  and if the tide be not stemmed there, then  it will flow  over all "
"Roxi Sackur,4585758541912174,01-03-1988
"
"""It's  no  good  going  back  there  to  search,  no.  We  doesn't  remember  all  the "
"are before you,  and your homes far  behind.  Yet, though you fight upon  an "
"bending in a mighty sweep south and west again, till it was lost to  view in "
"and  ran,  he  was ridden down and  a spear  passed through  him.  He gave a  "
     A long clammy hand went over his mouth and  another caught  him  by the 
"got  to tidy up and put the finishing touches to  the packing, before we get "
"Middle-earth, and great works  to  do. But if  all  the fair folk take to the "
""
though they themselves perished in the  deed; and Isildur Elendil's son  cut 
"whistle, it did  not  come from Frodo's direction. There it went again  from "
"founded in  ashen ruin, its huge cone rising  to  a great height,  where its "
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished 
"     'I'll  give  your  name and  number  to the Nazgyl,'  said  the soldier  "
     both. 
"     'Of course not,' said  Gandalf. 'It is two hundred  leagues or  more in "
the following wind came the sound of her voice singing. But now she  sang in 
"most of the time, but  it  was chiefly  nonsense, or else  perhaps a strange "
rivalry of Sauron  and  not  in his service yet. Over  all his works  a dark 
"Linoel Titcumb,4643730697177,27-07-1990
"
straw Sam burst into tears. 
and  on with only brief halts. These  they made not  so much for rest as  to 
"Kendal MacKonochie,4017951572916,20-01-1978
"
"They were just giving up hope, when Dori stumbled across him by sheer luck. "
"again. Aye,  aye, there was all  one wood once upon a time: from here to the "
     `Smjagol! ' he said softly. 
water -bottle.' 
on to it save by flying; and no path down off it except by jumping over a precipice. 
"round them, but never again. And anyway  he did  not understand them; and he "
"the march from Morgul Vale they made their last camp, and set fires about it  "
"     Aragorn stood a while hesitating. 'It is not my will,' he said,  'to put "
"     One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, "
"despair he looked  out  again on the black ships, and he lifted up his sword "
"     That  day  Frodo spoke to Elrond, and  it was  agreed  that they should "
     Next morning they set out  again soon after sunrise.  There was a frost  
"Dori O'Scollee,4577797766354746,08-11-1983
"
With that he plunged in. But it seemed to him  that he dragged his feet like 
lock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in. 
"chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.' "
"####-     It was Sam's  first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not "
"     But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in  his sleep, and "
"     'Well, er, yes, I suppose so,' stammered Bilbo.  "
down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went 
walked.  But  the  land  was  green  and  there  was  much  grass  through  which  the 
"the high pass he could not tell, or would not. "
"away, or, or destroy it?' "
"wandering about, tapping the stone here  and there with his axe. Legolas was "
"neither are we yet at open war with him; and  if you  are fleeing  from him, "
"making  no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in "
"exceptional,  as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendship "
"good  cook myself,  and  cook  bet-ter  than  I cook,  if you  see what  I mean.  I'll cook "
"Urson Ubsdell,4707572880777,30-09-1979
"
mostly go to bed  soon after the Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and  all could 
"must tell you. My scouts and watchers  have all returned, even some that have "
"     Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and his master "
"valley, and so came to Dunharrow as darkness fell. "
and the Men of the Sea -- desire came over me to see Fimbrethil  again. Very 
 
"one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall. "
"stood before him and the stench came out to meet him, like a clap of thunder  "
"Then he drew it, and  its polished and well -tended blade glittered suddenly, "
####- 
the defence of the Black Gate of their  land; and there now  their  Lord was 
"     Hardening his  will  Sam thrust forward once again, and  halted  with a  "
"""Not  at  all,  not  at  all,  my  dear  sir!  Let  me  see,  I  don't  think  I  know  your "
"Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Dbin also.' "
"ruthless, these alone will  achieve victory.  What could not a warrior do in "
guards were slain  or taken. It then seemed plain to  us that the attack had 
"""What had it  got in its pocketses?"" he said. ""It wouldn't say, no precious. "
""
     'Lembas!' whispered Pippin.  'Lembas: I've got some. Have  you? I  don't  
"merrymaking?"" asked the king. "
"     Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor! "
"that's  what  they call me.  Yes, Ent is the word. The Ent, I am,  you might "
creak  of  the wheels and the  slow clop of  the ponies' hoofs.  The  waggon 
####-protection  and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with 
"our realm; but it is now many lives of men since  any of  us  visited it, to "
"spell. Say, are you not a wizard,  some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his "
"Flemming Clarycott,4783569729756,28-02-1977
"
"meantime the  Uruk -hai of Isengard can do the dirty  work,  as usual.  Don't  "
     The company  was in the big common-room  of the inn.  The gathering was 
     It  is plain indeed that  in spite  of later  estrangement Hobbits  are 
"happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of "
"after him, him that  was the Gaffer's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over "
that rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my  news was no  great news 
"yes, things to help us."" "
"So  many dreadful things have  happened  in the  City, Merry, that  one poor  "
Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?' 
     He  led the way  in under the  huge branches  of  the trees. Old beyond 
hope as they had not known  since the darkness came  out of the East; and it  
"Bucklanders,  being brought  up anyhow  in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by "
'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is 
"the  least  he  shall  deliver  one  twelfth  portion  of  the  treasure  unto  Bard,  as  the "
"was  more  wickedness  than  this  afoot,  and  that  a  great  raid  of  the  whole  goblin "
"Dugald Turpin,4041596530192251,12-03-1995
"
from this point that they were  pursued; they may have made some  attempt to 
are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are  spare horses as you  
"over them, rising as they went on to  a bitter wind. The mountains seemed to "
"lay  ever to the east, and it sent its  golden beams down upon the trees and "
"who stood by wept, crying: 'Thjoden King! Thjoden King!' "
"Soon  there  came  the  sound  of  ""Lazy  Lob""  and  ""Attercop""  from  among  the "
"and far, a patch of shining sky. 'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the "
"ideas or suggestions."" He turned with mock-politeness to Bilbo. "
the Dead call.' 
you need not fear: my horse  will not let any rider  fall that I command him 
"roots of the  mountains. He often  comes here, especially  when  his mind is "
####-Still  more  suddenly  a  darkness  came  on  with  dreadful  swiftness!  A  black 
"least  three times the pony's value in those pans. It  proved to  be a bony, "
     Pippin had  an uncomfortable feeling that most  of what he had said  or  
"""No  good  roasting  'em  now,  it’d  take  all  night,""  said  a  voice.  Bert  thought  it "
"Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of "
"Oin  and Gloin wanted  to  light  a  fire  at  the  door  to  dry  their  clothes,  but Gandalf "
"'We'll tell you.' he croaked. `He  guessed it long ago, Baggins guessed it.' "
"     Ugl®k  shouted, and a  number of other Orcs of  nearly his own size ran "
"Juliann Sappell,4579276765673,05-03-1990
"
"clear  water, and out of it  the  Tower  of  Orthanc  rose  still, tall  and "
"Jonis Teasdale-Markie,4017956510725076,12-07-1976
"
"account, and said that they only took what was their due, for the elf-king had bar- "
"king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her will. And if "
"bridge-end, the  road  from the  west converged with others coming from  the "
"would forbid his entry, or his escape. "
"     'Edoras  those courts are called,' said Gandalf, 'and Meduseld  is that "
sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most dangerous of 
"the trees, as if the  world came there  to a sudden end, at a  brink looking "
the 
"before  the  Darkness: only myself, Fangorn, and  Finglas  and Fladrif  -- to "
and  bumping mass  of  casks  and  tubs  all  pressing  together  to  pass  under  the  arch 
"back towards the forest,  Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant green,  a dark  "
year's fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved  bay-trees climbing up a  
"That  is  why  neither  Bilbo,  nor  the  dwarves,  nor  even  Gandalf  heard  them "
"Antone Connolly,4255903504744292,20-12-1998
"
and that  was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow 
gatekeeper also went out just behind them.. 
"     But Aragorn answered: 'Nay, for these  three, and most soon for Faramir,  "
with the Elven-folk; for few of these  knew or would use the Westron tongue. 
after  a rest I went on with  the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't  
"flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your  pursuers will assail  "
"     There was a  black look in the sky, and  the sun was wan. The  wind had "
"long silver tassel. This last belonged to Thorin, an enormously important dwarf, in "
"He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.' "
"     'I shall be glad  to come,' said Pippin. 'I am  lonely, to tell you the "
     The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not 
"of their  eyes, the very malice of which made  him quail; but slowly he felt "
that could  come to the  City made haste  to come.  And the City  was filled 
     Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee 
"     `Winter deepens behind us,' he said quietly to  Aragorn.  'The  heights "
"made a great  bonfire in the  Forest, and  burned all the  ground in  a long "
four  beautiful  white  ponies  and  several  large  long-bodied  grey  dogs.  Beorn  said 
Hob. 
compulsion he turned slowly to face  the East. Far off the shadows of Sauron 
""
""
"     'If  you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not  he, how "
"to go and see him. But if I were you, I should press on now for home, or you  "
"and me alone to find a way back, and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank. "
"wasn't he, dad?""  ""Yes, my boy, the  famousest of  the hobbits,  and  that's "
"few notes on the more important points are here  collected from Hobbit-lore,  "
do -  but  it must not  be any  later. I  am getting  very anxious.  In  the 
have gone away.' 
"Shay Hampshaw,4707839624004387,18-04-1978
"
"daylight, better than any jewels,  begging your pardon.( But it's a long way "
"Marget Bayles,4041598904902,26-01-1988
"
them. 
"Timmi Herety,4041592931992,01-03-1981
"
last!'  said Merry.  'I was beginning to wonder if you would  turn up at all 
"indeed, Sam my dearest  hobbit, friend of friends  --  I do not think we need "
"Roseanna Randleson,4041374756602928,15-02-1977
"
"packs had fled. All about them  the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on "
"carried, not guessing its full  worth and potency. Seldom had  he remembered "
"great  significance.  It  does  not,  however,  concern  the  present  story,  and  those who "
"     'No.  He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered "
"Sam.' He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him. "
'It's all ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping 
"wall and the downs  we  have found no  other trace of them, and no trail has "
"the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below "
"forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed slept long and blessedly, "
"spread: ""Smaug is dead!"" Leaves rustled and startled ears were lifted. Even before "
"recovered. In the meanwhile what next?"" "
"Case Bulfoy,4017951452072744,22-06-1986
"
"Peyton Schwaiger,4017958005421310,05-08-2001
"
challenged?' 
"service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.' "
"Marybeth Fountian,4041590989315,11-11-1981
"
he  could  delay  no  longer-the  spiders  were  drawing  their  circle  ever  closer.  He 
"pale and clear  in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey "
and amid the music of harp and of viol and of flute and the singing of clear 
     Chapter 5   The Window on the West  
"good, always helps.' "
"accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the "
"draught  of  air  refreshed him, but  it almost puffed out his  light. He peeped  timidly "
"     'I wondered when you would think of it,' said Frodo. 'Open it!' "
There seemed nothing else to do. It was no good crawling back down to Gollum's 
"Gwenni Mayor,4041593638718046,08-05-2000
"
"Cally Pickring,4041591828033,26-04-1982
"
"mastered  the  Stone,  I  learned many things.  A grave peril I  saw  coming "
back with Frodo and himself. He scratched his head. 'Can't understand it  at 
"towards the Great Gate, and  others passing  out.  Now and again  a horseman "
whimpered. `Never came here; never come again.' 
"     It was the third evening since they had fled from  the Company,  as far "
away. Aragorn did not look  back: he was watching the  trail as they sped on 
"Anastasie Lethardy,4017952328367,07-02-1997
"
"that we here possess,' said Elrond. `And they who dwell beyond the Sea would "
"ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their  left, but near at "
instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous  orc-faces grinned  at  him  out of the 
     'On what?' said Sam. 
Westernesse had wrought there of  old; and Saruman  had dwelt there long and 
"     'What shall I do, what shall I do? ' he said.  `Did I come all this way "
"So  one  day,  although  autumn  was  now  getting  far  on,  and  winds  were  cold, "
from  a land  untroubled  by  it? Then we may  feel that our  vigil was  not 
"of stone. Partly ruinous  it seemed, but already before the night was passed "
"winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably  see more than any "
"were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows. 'No, it is  not "
"####-places the snow was breast -high, and often Boromir  seemed to bc swimming "
"country.  Where,  let  me tell  you,  I am considered  uncommonly large  and "
"too big for  your hats! But  if you don't  finish growing  up soon,  you are "
"Bar Heare,4041590932284279,31-01-1992
"
"Ninnette Risen,4041375898772,26-05-1989
"
"I  am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I  have had  a hard life "
see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to  ask  
younger folks-if  I could make  them understand the  need: if I could  rouse 
"Nikki Lugton,4041372047670,01-06-1987
"
"father's  house.  But  her  brothers, Elladan and  Elrohir,  were  out  upon "
little resistance to the Thain. Before the Year's End the few survivors were 
"Gaylord Dowgill,4041599155843,07-05-2001
"
"Alberta Cawcutt,4017957618410751,14-10-1984
"
"     'Did  you  hear me calling, Master, or was  it just chance that brought "
"of  rock, pierced by a  dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that "
""
"kind. Just before tea-time there came a tremendous ring on the front-door bell, and "
     `Sam!  '  cried Frodo  aghast. He had fallen deep into his own thoughts 
"Jorrie Ivanishin,4041592954002,01-07-1981
"
seemed hard to make his breath give any  sound. `It's as orc-like a place as 
Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered altogether. 
"     `Wait, Anborn,'  said Faramir.  `This is a harder matter than it seems. "
"     The  next day,  the fourth, was little  better, and the night almost as "
and  with that word the Riders set forth. They  rode over the Dike  and down 
     `That won't do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and 
"Aylmar Tallowin,4017951226695,04-02-2001
"
of the mirth and music in the hall about them.  Bilbo had not much to say of 
I'd rather have Gollum than orcs. At any rate he  won't give us away to them 
another  and eat it as you  fancy  -- somewhere private  and out o' my sight. 
     `What  are  you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first. 
     For a moment of silence Thjoden stood looking down at Jomer as he knelt 
     In the silent forest listening. 
"Mordor  alone! ' Pippin shuddered. 'But the dear silly  old hobbit, he ought "
"Drucie Gritsunov,4041593140718,11-11-1992
"
watch!' 
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver. 
"Ediva Perrat,4041375209079,07-07-1986
"
caution and  no mistake.  I  reckon  we may go  a  good deal further and see 
spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But 
breath and see the glare in its bloodshot eyes. It stopped short aghast. For  
"     'That is no comfort,' said Gimli. "
this upper court and reared its  horn high above the crest of the encircling 
sharply back  again  and were lost  in the  trampling. At the furthest point 
come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become rivals in her wars.  
     'The Chief's up at Bag End.' 
"     `What do you think of Elves now, Sam?  ' he said. `I asked you the same "
"lay there, pale-glimmering in the  last rays of  the  sickle moon.  The dark "
     Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes creep 
"beard;  he  was  so  sore  and  stiff,  so  bruised  and  buffeted  he  could  hardly  stand  or "
had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scored 
"why Smjagol  had tried to touch them. `Well, I don't  want to  see them,' he "
"asking funny questions. But perhaps you'll come along inside, and we'll pass "
you 
"     The door opened,  but no one could be  seen  to open it.  Pippin looked "
or hayfields of the Shire. He took a deep breath and started off. 
himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was  steadily growing. He 
disturbing anyone. And this is what he saw. Three very large persons sitting round 
"name was Meriadoc, but  that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping "
"like rain upon the Moon!"" "
"vanquished  and  his  spirit fled and was hidden for long  years,  until his "
     The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into  his mind. And  then 
and  setting  all  the  prisoners  free  as  quickly  as  possible.  This  sword's  name  was 
But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage.' 
"Vinny McMichell,4017953091250400,16-08-1980
"
that they went  north foreboding  of evil grew heavier  on them. It was near 
"Monika Southgate,4138134858529815,07-08-1998
"
"the Wild, and there were many other things in it in those days besides goblins; but "
poison to  still the struggling of  her meat; this time  to slay and then to 
"     `Well,  what was it? ' said  Frodo,  knowing that  Sam would not settle "
"side, beyond  the rows of tall  pillars that upheld the  roof. Monoliths  of "
     At first Frodo felt as if he  had indeed been turned into stone by  the 
""
Durin's  Day  when  the  last  moon  of  Autumn  and  the  sun  are  in  the  sky  together. 
"it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how  you're placed, not if I knows "
being driven unwilling to their Dark Lord's wars; all they cared for  was to 
if he had made  a  decision.  'I can't keep it dark any  longer.  I have got 
     `Regiments of  black  crows  are  flying over all  the land between the 
"moved him  most deeply. 'There  are some,  even in these parts, as  know the "
####-This is the plan that he made in council with the Elvenking and with Bard; and 
"     Slowly Thjoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers  took the hilt, "
"work, as usual. If you're afraid of the Whiteskins, run!  Run!  There's  the "
####-message came.  I thought  her  Sneak had  brought her a toy. or  that  you'd 
believe that any darkness will endure!' And he stooped and kissed her brow.  
halted and crowded anxiously together. 
""
"angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff  stretched  out to  meet "
"them even got up and bowed right to the ground before him, though they fell over "
"####-     Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both "
mean. Not in my present state. Even my mithril-coat seemed heavy when I  was 
"Now, feeling the way become steep before his feet, he looked wearily up; and "
"     `This is  bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. `I don't know  what this Man has "
"don't  deny it, but I'll never believe you  are  sleeping again, whether you  "
As  they went  on  Bilbo  looked  from  side  to  side  for  something  to  eat;  but  the 
and turned away. 
"Concealment was no longer  possible,  and they could only hope that no enemy "
"Saruman desires  above all else, but at the least two members of my Company, "
"his voice and language changed,  and he sobbed in his throat,  and spoke but "
"for a league between  two smoking  chasms,  and so  reached  a  long sloping "
"them enter,  for  they were  urgent. Denethor  turned  his head slowly  from "
"     'Tell us of Gil-galad,' said Merry suddenly, when he paused  at the end  "
cool up here.' 
"it  was  too  late.  He  was  witless  and  wandering,  and  had  forgotten  almost "
This road and no road looks towards safety  any longer. Be vigilant! But for  
"     'Indeed yes,' said Gandalf.  'Doubly. And is  not that strange? Nothing "
     'Kill  gorgyn! Kill orc-folk! No other words please Wild Men ' answered  
     Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning? 
chamber  and the  passage  outside. For an instant  the wizard  looked  out. 
spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.' 
"Breena Moff,4017954712022,22-07-1995
"
"what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all be sleepless!  "
"Presently  he  heard  voices  speaking  low, and  he  saw  dim half-shrouded  "
"There  was  an  autumn-like mist  white  upon  the  ground  and  the  air  was  chill, "
Great Jewel. I wish I could hear  it!  And I wonder how it will go on  after  
"Rangers are: the last  remnant in the North  of the great people, the Men of "
"now nearer, now further off. He wondered if the watchmen had heard it. "
"those days the plans for the journey seemed to be  in  more competent hands, "
torch from the hand of  one  and  sprang back into the house. Before Gandalf 
"may have  guessed, Pippin. You  could not hide the fact that Bor omir did not "
"     'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli. "
""
"carved stones, breathing and listening. "
"twig-fingers scraping  wall and window: creak, creak, creak. He wondered  if "
"Korrie Trippett,4017958881250585,23-05-1995
"
     Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. `Are you sure that you do not 
(as  a  matter  of  fact  they  were  brothers).  Bilbo  plumped  down  the  beer  and  the 
"     'No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn't stop to look.' "
bodies. Do you think I can't search you to the  bones? Search  you! I'll cut 
"no sound of wind,  no memory of tree or grass or flower, no image of moon or  "
     Undimmed by cloud or shade of night 
May  your  beer be  laid under an enchantment of surpassing  excellence  for  
"enough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom's words laid bare the hearts of "
     Then all listened while  Elrond in his clear voice  spoke of Sauron and 
     They stood now; and Sam still holding his master's hand caressed it. He 
"have the truth, or I will prepare something particularly uncomfortable for you!"" "
Of the Ordering of the Shire  
"West, and wise men that watched the stars.  But Saruman had slowly shaped it "
and Sam only knew vaguely that the Ring had somehow to be put into the fire. 
gasped. 
"they  flew, and yet were ever present, and their deadly voices rent the air. "
"     'Dark ways doubtless, said  Gimli, but no darker than these staves  are "
"     Where now she wanders none can tell, "
"     'Fight?'  said  Frodo.  'Well,  I  suppose it  may  come  to  that. But "
"to them, and when it spake to another they smiled, as men do who see through "
straggling pools and  reed-beds of the marshes  behind them. The land before 
"Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.' "
with me. Almost the last thing he ever said. I shan't ever be able to  smoke 
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo  thought the  old wizard looked unusually 
Naturally  the  dwarves  accepted  the  offer  eagerly.  Already  they  had  come  to 
"then he  must have been forced to ride away, and  he will not return. In any "
not meet their end here.' 
"hor se down that bank,' said Sam. 'But I guess he  knows we came down it.  We "
"Jorrie Duff,4803793368948,10-02-1999
"
"though the wormstench was heavy in the place, and the taste of vapour was on his "
"had  been  a  bridge  of  wood  across,  but  it  had  rotted  and  fallen  leaving  only  the "
"Frodo from capture, and under their  eye, as long as possible -- at any rate "
"not  so  bad  now  he  knew, more  or  less, what was  in  front  of  him. Had  he  known "
"     'Two!' said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the "
busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.' 
"     'You  shall  ride my  horse,'  said  Glorfindel.  'I will  shorten  the "
"he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride soon  to his crowning, "
"At last with an effort  he spoke, and wondered to hear his  own words, as if "
"""We  are  not  thieves,"" Bard  answered.  ""Your  own we will  give  back  in  return "
"land for their own, and they chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the "
reached across  the  path. Each step forward became more  reluctant than the 
"young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary, "
"in  idle  fancy?  Nay, Thjoden,  it is otherwise: to  them  you are  but the "
would it be now?' said Aragorn. 'You might have done worse. Who can say? 
"     'We cannot, of  course, go on again  tonight,' he said. `The attack   on "
     I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death. 
"valour, but our kin from afar  off, unlike the wild Easterlings or the cruel "
out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as 
"""Where's that?"" asked Bilbo, "
"     Sam yelled  and brandished Sting, but his little  voice was  drowned in "
"     Gimli  strode  a pace forward, but felt  suddenly  the hand  of Gandalf "
"     'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'No "
"Kacy Boake,4041596048387054,22-08-1981
"
Bilbo knew  it. He had  read of a good many  things he had never seen or done. 
"Leighton Pasby,4017952350825,20-03-1997
"
"fare!' "" "
are also  several newer tracks  that were not made by Rangers. At least  one  
"very walls of the Tower, and the cries and sounds of fighting could be heard "
"Florina Wisby,4041594998053917,11-12-1992
"
dark day's end. The vast vapours that  arose in  Mordor and  went  streaming 
"doors did  not open. `Well, well! ' said the wizard. `The passage is blocked "
Faramir 
passing up and down that  eyes could  not see. Frodo shuddered  as he looked 
"stream that crossed the path, and he ate three wild strawberries that he found on its "
know no other way. Therefore I shall go this  way. I do not ask anyone to go 
     He  poured  them  out two  full bowls  from a  stone  jar;  but  from a  
"Felipa Spurden,4041372470483104,15-12-1996
"
on. 
"     'Yes,' said Pippin. 'It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the "
"     'One day of light  we  rode, and then  came the  day  without dawn, a nd "
bright with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith 
"than  once  he  slipped  and  caught  himself  just  in  time; and at  last, after a dreadful "
the road.' 
captives  of  the  eagles. As Bilbo  listened  to  the  talk  of Gandalf  he  realized  that  at 
"Kristien Davenall,4503899920333,21-05-1989
"
"in love with their new land, and they  remained there, and soon passed  once "
hardly yet realize their release or be properly thankful for it. 
"further,' said Boromir. `If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon "
against a low pier of  rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond  
"Mareah Mintram,4041592138069,21-09-1978
"
""
"bow,  Legolas! Bend  it!  Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or "
""
into one voice and sent it rolling and beating on the walls of stone. 
some water and  spied  him nosing  round just as I  turned back. I reckon it 
"     They  hammered on  the outer gate and called, but there was at first no  "
banked up some feet above the level of the open land. 
scattered about in the West  of the World in those days than  the  people of 
air throbbing in your ears.' 
     Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name  as they entered.  
"""That can perhaps be mended,"" said the Lord of the Eagles. "
""
occasional Bucklander or  adventurous Took would come  out to  the Inn for a  
"     Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand. 'Well met indeed!' he "
see there something that  would guide him in his perplexities; but  time was 
"     'I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. It "
white horsetail flowed. He advanced  until the point of his spear was within 
"     'Yess, yes indeed,' said Gollum sitting up. 'Nice hobbits! We will come "
foot of Amon Hen. 
that was worse.' 
"""Back now to the Mountain!"" cried Thorin. ""We have little time to lose."" "
"first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm  is meant.' This  was done, "
"is  rash  to  be  too  sure,  yet I think that  we  may hope  now  that  the "
that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought with his Enemy.' 
     Laboriously they climbed a  sharp slope and halted for a  moment at the 
"the realm was of old, its voice will not pass unheeded. "
"evidence  that  is  inadequate  and  ambiguous.  It  is also  false,  though "
the cliffs echoed. 
will have peace with you and  Orthanc.  So  much  for  the House  of  Eorl. A 
"Street, a broad way running towards  the  Great Gate. In it he found the Old "
down. Ugl®k or the Isengarders might return at any minute. 
"Aluin Shapcott,4516740919734,06-03-1996
"
"Fletch O'Cannan,4504458617765543,01-07-1990
"
"Guthrie Gimeno,4041596451619928,08-01-1991
"
tower. Sam felt desperate. They were carrying off his master's body for some 
his eyes on the ground. 
"you had best get on foot, until you are over the bridge. Are you going to stay a bit "
"Of course they soon came down after him, hooting and hallooing, and hunting "
""
spit. Then  he  moved on again. Now they could hear  his voice creaking  and 
"Harv Skiplorne,4163569627346280,08-07-1983
"
     'If only  they  are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired  soldiers 
"tables.  These  were  very  low,   low  enough  even  for  Bilbo  to  sit  at  comfortably. "
full blaze of the fire and torches. It was no good. Out went all the lights again and 
"""Well, of course you haven't seen Oin and Gloin yet. And, bless me! here they "
####-up to. No need to trouble  Strider or the others tonight. I'll keep watch. I 
the moon on a hill-side rock or a stream in the plains. 
ride with me on any road. Good night!' 
"     'Hail, Lord  of the Mark!' said Jomer. 'The dark night has  passed  and "
"Daryl Dawtre,4017958553182,06-09-1989
"
"furniture,  were  left  in his possession. There was,  however, no sign  nor  "
"took the journey upon  myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long "
eyes; and he was reminded not so much of Boromir as of Aragor n.  'Dark 
things look  as hopeless  as  a frost in spring.  Just when being  invisible 
"on either side, all making their swift secret way to some appointed place. "
"     With doom we come, with doom we come! "
"He  went  on,  until  he  came  to  the  great  doors  at  the  further  side,  and  there  a "
"Hobbiton folk, they  saw it. She  comes down the lane with her old umbrella. "
returned  with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the 
"     It was  evening, and the  grey light  was again  waning fast, when they "
thick as summer-moths round a candle!' 
"     At last Legolas turned, and seeing  them  now far behind,  he spoke  to "
alone-for you cannot count friends that are all packed up in barrels. 
"on  either side, like living gate-posts; bu t  there was  no gate  save their "
"     They went  into the farmer's  kitchen, and sat by  the wide fire-place. "
"this bed-loft, that I shan't roll off,' he said. "
"woods,  as  1.  have  already  told  you;  also  Bilbo  had  slipped  on  his  ring  before  he "
strong black-haired man with huge arms and a great beard. I cannot tell you much 
"stoop;  and  even  grownup  he  had  still  spent  a  deal  of  his  time  at  quoits,  dart-"
"host, crying: "
"we've got  the rope,' he said. 'We've set a little puzzle for  that footpad, "
"     'What is the  light?'  he said  to  Strider,  who had  risen,  and  was "
""
"the ground beside him lay two small rabbits, which he was  beginning to  eye "
     'I  have finished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry 
"     'Only  one  now remains  that you could use ,'  answered Aragorn for you  "
rolling  and  tumbling  into  every  cave  and  hollow;  and  the  darkness  is  filled  with 
"Max Maylin,4334578398850,24-07-2000
"
"quickly."" "
barely . ' 
"there are other reasons.' He  stepped forward,  but Gandalf stayed him  with "
"     'King! Did you hear  that? What  did I say? The  hands  of  a healer, I "
"     `I think we shall  get tired  of that word soon,' said Sam. 'But  never  "
"All he knew was that the river seemed to go on and on and on for ever, and he "
"done  that  much  good.  It  had  wakened  him  up  wide  in  a  splintered  second,  and "
"Gollum returned, carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.  "
"     'A Halfling,' answered Gandalf. 'Nay,  not the one that was spoken of,' "
"     'Another wa y!  ' said Frodo  doubtfully, looking down  at  Gollum  with "
"Chico Nevet,4017951366640,29-03-1999
"
secret is forgotten.' 
"the mountain-sides. It  all went very quiet. A few wolves howled mournfully, "
"stumbling, as if his eyes no longer saw the way before his feet. Sam guessed "
"Brendan Andryunin,4041374511764,11-04-1987
"
"under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the "
####-
"it,  and he continued  to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he  got "
"spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.' He named them one by one. "
"and caressing Frodo's brow, he spoke in his ear. "
was 
they 
"highway. Not were Minas Tirith  falling in ruin and  I alone could save her, "
     'There are eyes!' he said.  'Eyes looking out  from the shadows  of the 
""
"stealing up the slopes, singly or in long files, keeping always to the shade "
"Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I  "
"Calla Juszczyk,4017957397847,04-06-1995
"
     'Not so  clearly.  What I  have told you is what Gollum was  willing to 
lie still.' 
"Reginauld Smewin,4241293533732022,20-02-1978
"
laughter.  Sometimes  there  was  singing  in  the  distance  too.  The  laughter  was  the 
"     'I am commanded  to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,' "
regions where pain and delight flow together and tears are the  ver y wine of 
the Cross-roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith they came at last to the end 
"     The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled close "
"     and stones crack in the frosty night, "
The dwarves no more shall suffer wrong. 
"a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.' "
nearly frantic. 
adventures very well. 
"expect  to  see  how  far  the  forest  lasted.  Still  he  did  not  see  this,  and  he  climbed "
shrinking away from Gandalf. 'I will send for it at once. Do you understand?  
"windows showed, like countless black holes  looking inward  into  emptiness;  "
     A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark  faded to 
"darkness  gave way, and he came  back to the waking  world and found that it "
"     'I have still this to say,' answered Aragorn. 'No  enemy has  yet taken "
"     'I  don't keep  water in my  pockets,' said  Frodo. 'We thought you had "
"master had  been  saved;  he was  himself again, he was free. And  then  Sam "
"way down  a long  flight  of steps, and then looked back; but they could see "
"were  come  to  spy  on  them,  and  would  take  news  of  their  plans  down  into  the "
""
"away  from the  pain,  she  bent her writhing limbs  beneath  her and sprang "
"     'I do. But I think we'll trust our luck together, Sam; or our blessing. "
I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news I am not sure; but they did 
"As  soon  as  our  attack began,  the few remaining rats in Isengard started "
had been  cut down recklessly far  and wide over the Shire; and Sam  grieved 
"Mountain!""  he  said.  ""This  is  a  bitter  adventure,  if  it  must  end  so;  and  not  a "
their homeward way or  in  the house of Beorn; but every now and again he would 
the  heir of  Elendil  should  come  forth and  strive with  Sauron  for the 
"Frodo a little uneasy. One of  the Bree-landers, who seemed to  have been in "
"off the shadow and dismiss  the phantoms, he began  slowly  to descend. With "
about  the Elves before the  fading time.  I would dearly  like to hear more 
"has been  necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, making full use of "
blocked the way back. A voice spoke to them from above. 
battle was won and the game of Golf invented at the same moment. 
"Electra Josebury,4041377961588147,09-10-1999
"
found that for the first time he was close to  Merry. The Orcs were making a  
     Afar they saw him strong and fair 
first:  quite contrary to his  habit. The idea of a 'present' was  not  mere 
"somebody  there,  and  of  spying  the outlet  to  the passage which  the  thief had used. "
"back with gold."" "
least. In any case we did  not kill him:  he is very old  and very wretched. 
cried. Cheers from all the assembly. /  have called  you all  together for a  
""
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me 
"     'Well, be  off with you!' said Rosie. 'If you've been looking after Mr. "
valley.  
"But  they  did  not  know  this,  and  they  were  burdened  with  the  heavy  body  of "
hands  might  have some virtue to keep them  hidden beyond all hope  in this 
"Myrle Melledy,4041594064164,22-09-1976
"
back to the abyss prepared  for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that 
"Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings.  But "
"opening grew  suddenly  wide.  Arrows  came  whistling  in, but  struck  the  "
Barrels Out of Bond 
eyes!  ' 
"Alonzo Mattessen,4041595970258374,20-04-1991
"
"     To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's "
"Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared. "
even if they knew so much themselves; they would not speak openly to them of 
     'Here at  last we find  news!' said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken leaf 
"praised and thanked. Here it is,"" said he handing the map to Thorin. "
Mablung. `These cursed Southrons  come  now marching up the ancient roads 
"seemed,' answered the Dwarf.  "
"now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind. "
"aside, Frodo might be killed out of hand at any moment. "
got down off his pony. 
"     'I won't be left behind,  to be called for on return!'  said  Merry. 'I  "
"if it comes to fighting. Some have bows, anywa y. They've shot one or two  of "
     At  once  four  men  came  striding  through  the  fern from  different 
"put slips right, and small thanks. But don't forget: the enemies don't  love "
"you  come  again! And with you come  evils  worse  than before, as  might be "
"hear again  a running water so beautiful, for  ever blending its innumerable "
     'May it keep you well!' said Thjoden.  'It was made for me in Thengel's 
"taters, precious, eh, what's taters?  "
craftsmen  that  could  be  spared were  busy. Some were  strengthening  the 
"Robbie Luckey,4041595142501453,20-07-1996
"
####-suspicion and annoyance. 'You are always badgering me about my ring; but 
River. 
####-as if all the Vale of Anduin waited for the onset of a ruinous storm. 
Right  in  the middle of  the  fight up  came Balin. The dwarves had heard noises 
"But ma ster has gone  to sleep,  and perhaps Sam wants to sleep. Doesn't want "
"     'I will come when I may,' said Aragorn. "
as if he was listening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and look ed 
####-Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.' 
and slipping off the ring. 
"     'The  Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and  they seemed to know "
     Suddenly the foremost  Rider  spurred  his horse forward. It checked at 
"stream. So they came  to  a wide green land, and beyond it was a broad river  "
""
jagged  rift in the  Morgai  out  into the  valley of Gorgoroth  and away to 
he said. `It was not an orc. It fled as  soon as I touched the tree-stem. It 
again until the last battle is fought;' he said. 
packed what  they  could  on  the  ponies  and  the  rest was made  into  a  store under  a 
"Gardy Mishaw,4041378388093521,18-07-1982
"
"     'Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as "
It was just at this moment that Bilbo suddenly discovered the weak point in his 
Come back to the City before all are overwhelmed!' But the  wind  that  sped 
"####-wore, the silent wardens  of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon "
tangled  thorn-bushes  that  grew in  thickets in many places. In  the  late 
"that the tree that grew in the   field was right inside it, and stood proudly "
"down and vanished.  But  even as it  fell it swung  its whip, and the thongs "
dashed along the bridge;  but  they had  hardly reached its further end when 
"Chaddie Scouler,4555192412753226,10-06-1999
"
"any hope of morning, nor felt any wind, changed or unchanged. "
"Bentlee Pauleit,4041594617989350,06-06-1993
"
 
"will,  there  is no other  way  for  us  --  unless  you  would  go  back  to "
""
""
"Rubin Garms,4041599573835653,19-05-1993
"
dwindled into black specks  in the whiteness. At length they too passed from  
went down the hill again.' 
"catapults were set, with many yells and the creaking of rope and winch, they "
####-housing shall be found for you.' 
visible)  
"trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part  of you. The  trouble with "
came 
of the gathering  mirk the Nazgyl came with. their  cold voices crying words 
"Britni Astling,4041595057555,26-05-1989
"
"hardened in him, and he felt through  all his  limbs a thrill,  as if he was "
Turn at last to home afar.  
"circled in  the  air: two small dark figures,  forlorn, hand  in hand upon a  "
the marks of soft feet beside  a muddy pool. But now the trail was fresh and  
"to  see what may be   seen. And look! It is  as  my heart guessed, Frodo went  "
good-night. 
"     'No!  I  heard that  one of them has  got something,  something  that's "
"Delmor Hudspeth,4860075661796,08-12-1993
"
particularly  excellent  fireworks!  I  remember  those!  Old  Took  used  to  have  them 
"Kenton Jozef,4041371481010674,23-11-1981
"
"     `He will not go  away or go to sleep at  your  command, Smjagol,'  said "
"knees, and he  sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it "
"all  the way with  them, never  saying  if he was  in  the adventure or merely keeping "
"sun was warm, and  the  wind was in the  South. Everything looked fresh, and "
"through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen "
"the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down "
"     But Troll don't care, and he's still there "
"turn will come  soon enough, I suppose. I  wonder what they are all  talking "
"leave  us in  peace, I  think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that "
"you! Do you know,  I shall  be one hundred and twenty-nine? And  in one year "
     For some  time the companions crawled and groped upon  the  ground. The 
"though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where you go, "
right. I could stand there without a hold. I'll--' his words were cut short. 
leather  upon  which  the  evil  Eye was  painted  in red above the beaklike 
"ridge and brought them at last to a still narrower ledge, which turned north across "
"or  tussock.  He fell  and came heavily on  his hands, which  sank deep into "
"     'Who cut the cords she'd  put round  him, Shagrat? Same one  as cut the "
"goblins,  before  you  could  say  rocks  and  blocks.  There were  six  to each dwarf, at "
"Peria Rollings,4041370365579,10-10-1987
"
master is  a beggar in  the wilderness. I passed him on the road. The King's 
"     Strangely enough, Frodo felt  refreshed. He had been dreaming. The dark  "
in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall. 
"     'Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,' said Treebeard. 'I  am honoured by "
"with  Beorn  for  the  last  time,  and  after  the  meal  they  mounted  the  steeds  he  was "
"Basil Herculson,4041596609495,20-05-1988
"
"assailing the White Towers and the  Havens, hereafter the Elves may  have no "
flock of birds into the distance. 
     with morning mist and silver sun 
"from the lake, and sometimes neither goblin nor fish came back. "
 
"time the dwarves had gone on again, a long, long, way on into the dark tunnels of "
"Cherida Thoresbie,4041594246500487,02-10-1978
"
"this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is "
"Our  paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting  there "
"Jeniffer Kerby,4017952321867,20-07-1982
"
the  other  side  is  a  cliff  standing  up  from  a  swirling  channel.  I  had  to  walk miles 
"     `And I,' said Aragorn, `counselled that we should hunt  for Gollum. too "
echoed as if to drum and trumpet. 
"Kizzie Rennison,4041592441521,06-12-1984
"
"the lads that run errands so few, and all the roads blocked. Why, it is days "
"his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many Orcs lay slain, piled all about "
evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of 
his groping forefinger.  
"from the  Great Gate of the City, north-eastward, the wall  was four leagues "
grate that would not allow a good fire. In the upper  rooms were little rows 
than Sam had feared. The day  after the battle Frodo  rode to Michel Delving 
"Jared Duchant,4041373972546,10-03-1993
"
"thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what "
"####-grasp. The evil that was devised long ago  works on  in many  ways,  whether "
"was  the  ring  still,  in  his  left  pocket,  and  it  slipped  on  his  finger.  The  goblins "
"dark, not  only because of the  smokes of the Mountain: there seemed to be a  "
of a forlorn and  weary hobbit  that no listening orc could possibly mistake 
again. Suddenly  he  fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands with rending 
certain going  over like that without  even a look to see what  to make for. 
""
unspoilt.' 
too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?' 
top  of  a  great  hump of bare rock.  Ahead of them  there was a bay in the 
no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: they 
"Tomaso Gobeaux,4017954284467280,30-11-1999
"
"     'For a little while,' said Thjoden. "
     It walked the forests long ago.' 
Mithrandir?  The Rohirrim are  fighting  on  the  fields  of Gondor! We must  
depart. But  he himself went up alone into the  secret room under the summit 
"some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils  lay ahead, "
"     `You cannot  pass,' he  said. The  orcs stood still, and a dead silence "
"treachery and murder? Remember Thjodred at  the Fords, and the grave of "
"     Sam knew before he spoke, that  it was vain, and that  such words might "
my best.' 
"them. Two of them had already fallen to his sword, staining the hallows with "
"air behind them, and before  them the darkness was cold on their faces. They "
climbing up and up. 
Lithui.  Then su ddenly the cry of brazen-throated  trumpets was  heard: from 
"the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed  over other rills, running down "
"     `That's funny,' said Merry. 'Almost  exactly what I felt  myself; only, "
"want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?' "
between  the  fires  of  the siege  and the outer  fields. Still  they  were 
####-nasty crawling spider on a wall.' 
     'Why  not? What is wrong with Strider?' Pippin  whispered. 'He meant to 
""
"     Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was "
"looking!"" "
secret. They usually  stood  open  and doorwards sat here. But  if they were 
"     'It is likely enough,' said  Aragorn; 'yet I am not sure. I am thinking "
"""We will have King Bard!"" the people near at hand shouted in reply. ""We have "
meeting!' 
know what. 
a  great  respect  for  him  (as  Gandalf  had  said  they  would).  Indeed  they  really 
"     `For me there is no comfort in our speech together,' said Faramir; `but "
"a  moment  he  relapsed into his old  Gollum-manner. 'We are famisshed,  yes "
journey under the shadow of evening. It is  as well;  for  it is my  counsel 
     Legolas  and  Gimli were now riding  together  upon one horse; and they  
"and a s slippery as a  fish. I hoped the river -voyage would beat him, but  he "
Sandyman. 
""
amused and annoyed. 'Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself 
grudgingly he permitted me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.  
"tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, and  Envinyatar, the Renewer': and  "
ordained that you should hold it for a while.' 
"will know all the news now, for  they have visited  Bill Ferny; and probably  "
thought he was just making an excuse and did not mean to come back. What was 
"""Somebody must climb a tree and see if he can get his head above the roof and "
"ready. In those years Wormtongue's task was easy, and all that  you did  was "
lord.  Rough and proud  now seemed all his  dealings with  Thjoden. And over  
forest of Neldoreth.  There he beheld L®thien singing and dancing in a glade 
waiting  upon  the king was  the lady Jowyn. They ate and drank swiftly. The 
"you up to, by the way?"" "
"Emili Herrema,4536934527624873,19-02-1995
"
were  by axe or  sword. The shards  came severally to  shore: one was  found 
light was shining;  he  saw it  glowing  on  Sam's face beside  him. Turning 
perhaps have told them that name  and its  significance: Gandalf  would have 
"sides, and he stands as still as a door -tree.' "
"Orlando Hune,4017954142932921,04-10-1980
"
Then  Bilbo  fled.  But  the  dragon  did  not  wake-not  yet  but  shifted  into  other 
"     `Steady! Steady!  ' cried  Gandalf as Merry and  Pippin pushed forward, "
"overlooked just now by  - no, no, I can't speak of it.  Help me, Pippin! It's "
"they dared not climb it yet, it was too exposed. "
daresay it'll  keep you from harm better than any other gear. It was made by 
""
"     When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake: "
took to  their  paddles  and  hastened forward. The banks  slid by. Soon the 
"Pace Gimber,4017952366672,21-08-1994
"
"looks  in his eyes at times, especially towards Frodo; and he went back more "
"Lucius Allcott,4041591379367,25-01-1996
"
came in now through the broken roof. On the hearth wood was burning. 
It had  always been a notion  of his that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was 
countless other  autumns  that drifted over  the banks of  the path  from  the deep  red 
"     'Begging  your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he  said, `but this has gone on long "
the  baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up  and  
Heave ho! Splash plump ! 
Bag  End  did not take effect  until  midnight.  But Lobelia  can perhaps be 
"prodded  Gollum.  His  hands  uncurled  and  twitched, but he made  no other "
parched mouth his tongue seemed thick and swollen; but for all his care they  
that there had been a time when there was much coming and going  between 
own  fear I should have guessed that they  were beasts wild with some sudden 
"eyes, and all else fades.' "
did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!' 
"     'It is rather a strange and sad story,' he went on after a pause. 'When "
inclined  to  feel  a  bit  proud  of  himself  as  he  drew  near  the  lower  door. There was 
"little sunshine,  and in the  distance the voices  of  the Ents at the  Moot "
####-to rule. 
Big Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny. 
"black squirrel, and I saw no tail. 'Twas like a shadow on the ground, and it "
threw no light  into that stifling  dark. He was come  to the  heart of  the 
"long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one,  when we "
after to the end of his days. ' 
"Mirilla Nerne,4041592735641,04-02-1979
"
 
"near one end, at the head of  the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its "
"####-spy of Saruman's; but whether he was working  with the Black Riders,  or for "
"Old Tomnoddy, all big body,  "
"the children and the old, should stay  to the refuges  that  you have in the "
eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning.( But in Gondor the New Year will 
"Charisse Windross,4041593956204,03-07-1994
"
"Bilbo had escaped the goblins, but he did not know where he was. He had lost "
they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They 
"the Starkhorn, cloven by the river in ages past . "
"Bert Blois,4041593806201,07-03-1977
"
another ancient road  crossed  the  East  Road  just outside (he dike at the 
"Sherwin Dell Casa,4041598828994,31-01-1975
"
"'I have  heard strange words,  and I see new per ils far off. I have laboured "
come thither? It is seven days since he rode away.' 
"thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents, lit  from beneath "
"up. Then suddenly, without  warning, Ugl®k sprang  forwards,  and  with  two "
since the evening of  that day  we  have  journeyed from the shadow  of  Tol  
"Riders do  not love it, and  fear those who wield  it. Fire is our friend in "
"sinking, "
"recover, Shagrat darted past and down the stairs.  "
soon had a plan which seemed to them most amusing. 
scorches  as well  as  they  could; but  it was  a  long  time before  the hair on  the back 
"doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a  smile on his face. In "
"William  choked.  ""Shut  yer  mouth!""  he  said  as  soon  as  he  could.  ""Yer  can't "
"Nate Whitmore,4987910922122790,08-09-1984
"
actually be heading towards the Withywindle va lley: not at all the direction 
shows a scratch or sign of wear.' 
####-dwindled  into  the  foggy night. Suddenly  Frodo laughed: from the  covered 
stone was set; his locks  were shorn about his shoulders.  On a  baldric  he 
But  Bilbo  simply  could  not  think  of  any  question  with  that  nasty  wet  cold 
trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you  
"brighter when night is  about you. May it be a  light to you in dark places, "
"Ring, and news of  its peril had already been brought here-which proved well "
""
"     Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind "
"a young Baggins, and too obviously considered her face shapely. "
"####-goblins came into the hills out of the North. I cannot say, though I fancy the last is "
     Ah!  the  gold and the red  and the sighing of leaves  in the Autumn in  
""
     Frodo looked  up. His heart went suddenly cold.  He caught the  strange 
"a great effort he concealed it, for Sam had other things to think about. The "
"of a thicket of  young trees an Elf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood "
"Gael Bartolozzi,4937171846829868,15-03-1993
"
"     'There  you are, Frodo!' said Merry. 'I knew we should have  to  fight. "
"willow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense. "
"     'So  near to Mordor?' said  Beregond quietly.  'Yes,  there it lies. We "
On hearth in the gloaming 
friendship of mine goes with him. 
this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I 
"back with  viols  as  big  as  themselves,  and with  Thorin’s  harp wrapped  in  a  green "
"Tiffany Deakes,4017950946780,16-03-1989
"
"     'Elves!' exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. 'Elves, sir!' He would have "
"Boothe Gillett,4041590367975,11-05-2000
"
"sprang from  her hand.  'In this  phial,' she said, `is  caught the light of "
"heard  Frodo's  voice, but it seemed to  come from a great distance, or from "
"Sam tried to count the  steps, but  after two hundred he lost his reckoning. "
####-shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling 
"feet. 'Come and be warm, if you are cold!'  He strode  forward, but the  old "
those  who  saw  him wondered; for they  had  not marked before how tall and 
"helmets,  as  long  lines  of  the wicked  folk  crept  down  the  hillsides  from  their  gate "
"Jodee Bathoe,4041374402900106,12-05-1997
"
"Arne Brownsea,4041591754910645,31-05-1995
"
"above it,  the  signs of  Elendil  that no lord had  borne  for years beyond "
The old hole was now being cleared a little. 
"the Shire  several times, wanted to know where the  Underhills lived and who "
""
     There were  rockets like  a flight  of scintillating birds singing with 
to 
"named  it  the Shire, as the region of the  authority of their Thain,  and a  "
returned. 'Follow me!'  he said. 'Thjoden gives you leave  to enter; but any 
it  would  have  overthrown  you.  Were  it  buried  beneath  the  roots  of 
""
ready for the  great council?' 
"veil  of water was hung, so  near that Frodo cou ld  have put an outstretched "
"     'That won't  do,' said Gandalf sternly. 'What did you see, and what did "
through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away. 
man both tall and strong. 
"     But that  desire  was yet far  away, and long  now had she been hungry, "
and the  noise  of  many  feet or the swift passing of some  cruelly  ridden 
"there  are  other marks,  very strange marks,  which  I do not understand. I "
battlement; then they plunged down between high rock -walls in a cu tting that 
glimpse of  Bilbo  walking restlessly about his room. The table was littered 
"behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it "
"Valentin Rowling,4041598815627688,06-01-1998
"
horses  like  those that  are  bred in  that  great vale  between the  Misty 
"and all his little impudence of courage, he  slashed  the bright elven-blade "
"####-have played  their  part. And  not  only in  dealing with that,  hoom,  that "
farewell. 
"bed. Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and "
"knowledge and memory of Gandalf, took the right road to the right pass. "
"     `You're right,'  said  Sam.  `And don't think I'm  finding  fault. I've "
But even with the Eagles they were still outnumbered. 
the last of them vanished into the black hole. 
"was plainly fast  asleep,  whiffling  and twitching in  his  secret  dreams.  "
the fight remained but the  charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on 
     Tongues began to wag in  Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the coming 
"Ezekiel Ebbing,4041376742222752,15-01-1988
"
"they passed,  and  suddenly before  them the Great Gates opened,  an arch of "
""
"     Next day they went on into  northern Dunland, where  no men now  dwelt, "
off  and  would not  dare to  return. The threat of snow lift ed; the  clouds 
would 
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey  shapes in the 
storm-wrack. 
"What has roots as nobody sees, "
"went  forth  and came to the barrier, and  H®rin  of the Keys thrust it back; "
"was  really  an  endless  network  of  pools,  and soft  mires. and  winding "
"skulking  outside,  and  your  job  is  to  do  all  the  dangerous work  and  get what  you "
punch from an Ent-fist crumples up iron like thin tin. 
     'Oho! So they  haven't  told you what to expect? They don't tell us all 
"Berke Cacacie,4041596374272,28-01-1989
"
 
forgetting  this  sort  of  thing.  But  just  as  Bilbo  was  beginning  to  hope  that  the 
"fear. Well, I must come, since no  other  help can  reach  him. But evil and "
"     'My  lord,'  he said to  the king, 'there are horsemen behind us. As we "
boiled. The daylight grew  and the  air became  warm; the dew faded off turf 
"fell under the dragon-sickness, and took most of the gold and fled with it, and died "
"the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that one of their own number had "
     The Men and  Dwarves were mostly talking of  distant events and telling 
"their  foreheads  and  said  ""Poor  old Baggins!""  and  though  few  believed  any  of  his "
"wrath;  for  these were young men from Rohan,  from Westfold  far  away,  or  "
"     He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried. "
"Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch  by inch, until both  "
"     `Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the  wind,  long years numberless  as "
"sun had not yet set. 'I think we  could manage this,' he  said presently. `I  "
"     Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight, "
"Loud  the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout of many  throats under "
begun 
"####-lead over the threshold; and at once a blindness  came  upon him,  even upon "
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose  to do? Why  
"now,  did  you? Nothing  at  all! Well,  that's  just  like  them. And  I  suppose  they  are "
"Wilow Mincher,4041377322448940,16-12-1988
"
     'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple: 
his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard's.  
     Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties. 
"but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that "
esquire  of Rohan of the household of  Meduseld!' he said.  'Take your sword 
"     'You will need every man and more,' said  Gandalf.  'Make  all haste. I "
they  but they  clove through the Southrons  like a fire-bolt  in  a forest. 
     After breakfast  a messenger from the Tookland rode in. He was in  high  
"Galadriel.  There are  columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose,  Legolas, "
when  at last  Thjoden and Gandalf and their companions  rode down from  the 
"put away, but he was permitted to  keep the grey cloak of Lurien, though not  "
"and very scratched, and they were also no longer certain of the direction in "
"long-planned, and we are but one piece in it, whatever pride may say. Things "
"the earth, or  from boughs above  their heads, or perhaps  from the boles of "
name is Underhill.' 
"     'All  who  can  have now got safe  within, Aragorn,' he  called.  'Come "
"about the ring,  especially since last night. No need to worry.  But if  you  "
"given by other folk:  Forn by the Dwarves,  Orald by Northern Men, and other  "
"leave you for a bit  and trust to luck. Water we must have, or we'll  get no "
"now by pity, a figure robed  in white, but at its breast it held a  wheel of "
Gimli. 
     Yours in haste  
"####-his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another,  and the  air of  the "
"     Across the  mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff,  the Dark Lord  had "
"no  one greeted them. They wondered  at  this, but they soon  discovered the "
 
"There need not be, there would not be, any  real change in our designs, only  "
"the Shire,'  said Merry. 'Won't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the "
"Kurtis Raulin,4041371560293,22-11-1984
"
"wonder. Well, we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan come, if "
""
"them to  grow  according to  their wishes, and bear leaf and fruit to  their "
"a haze and shimmer, far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away. "
"     'Very  well, Mr. Baggins,' said the  leader, pushing the barrier aside. "
the gates.  
will not fail.' 
"Krista Hirth,4041598044030,20-03-1975
"
Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying  like a  sea of fallow gold 
"""What's  he  got  in  his  handses?""  said Gollum,  looking  at  the  sword, which  he "
ages past. they did not  know: but many byways they  had  themselves  delved 
     'Faramir!'  he  cried aloud  with the others.  'Faramir!'  And  Faramir 
"####-South  there  was  no  sign  of  the  dragon,  but  there  was  a  gathering  of  very  many "
moving branches. Looking  through an opening on the south side  of the  flet  
running  water. High up above the  tall cliffs were  steep slopes upon which 
"They have black squirrels there, 'tis said.' "
that words of his were useless. And after all he never had any real hope  in 
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves.  
"     The king sighed, but no one answered, until at last Jomer spoke. 'We do "
"     'It was not  the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship  waned,' said "
under his bristling brows. 
"has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.' "
"world's  end,' he murmured. 'Nine mounds and seven there are now  green with "
"and he began to sweat. A sound, too, began to throb in his ears, a sort of bubbling "
"""I wish I had been there! I would have given them more than fireworks!"" "
look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden? ' 
""
"the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and they're missed. And Harry "
"Deep down here by  the dark water  lived old Gollum, a small slimy creature. I "
"Since then I have  searched  for your  trail. Two days  ago I found  it, and "
are coming.  There is  nothing more.'  Gandalf paused  and stood  in  silent 
"Mirror mere.  an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, hut many "
"     'No,' said Frodo. `I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights "
"""Better sit on  the  last fellow first,"" said Bert, whose eye had been damaged by "
"they  were in name his subjects, but they were, in  fact, ruled by their own "
"northward, above the grey hither lands, into the eye of the  cold wind where "
the call of their Captain. He  now was destroyed; but Gothmog the lieutenant 
visit to the  Shire long  ago. In  that dusty  chamber  in the mountains  it 
least he should come unheralded by us.' 
We can fill it again when we go on.' With that Sam plunged into sleep. 
"Brose Aubert,4041375562396621,21-12-1975
"
"it would take  too long,  for I  do not know the way, and our food would not  "
goes: I see it in your face.' 
"It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any  could claim "
returns!' 
"     In panoply of ancient kings, "
"into  limes when the world was wider, and  the  seas flowed straight to  the "
"     'Then let us weigh  the matter in our  minds, while the others rest and "
wicked creatures were afraid  to cheat when  they played at  it. But he  felt he could 
"comings  and  goings  of  the  monster,  Thorin  knew  every  passage  and  every  turn. "
But Merry to his shame was not to go with them. 
"'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North  is our "
"sign of goblins, no sign of dwarves. His head was swimming, and he was far from "
"to Jowyn above in  the Hold, and the  memory was grievous; but now he turned "
"he  produces  an  heir,  and  has  all  the  papers  made  out  proper.  The "
"friend  and  fellow  conspirator,  this  most  excellent  and  audacious  hobbit-may  the "
"####-     Up, up he went. It was dark save  for an occasional torch  flaring at a  "
roll-roll-rolling down the hole I  
"time to turn to lighter matters:  to devise, say,  a  fitting reward for the "
     Sam and  his master sat just within  the  fern-brake and ate their stew 
"their kinsfolk in the South, or from the vineyards of Men in distant lands. "
"tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you are weary. He shall come "
"hobbit and no more valiant  than I am a man,  save perhaps  now and again by "
"coming  on  fast. Before  long  you will  be  having  snow  and what not, and supplies "
"'Except Gandalf, of course. I think they  must be related. My dear ass, your "
unused to  cities and  houses of  stone.' And he commanded  that  his banner  
"     'Maybe,  I could,' said Aragorn, smiling.  'There are  some other signs "
"and was silent, as if in sudden doubt. Very amazement for a moment conquered "
"all.  It  don't  look quite orc-fashion, but it'll  keep you  warmer; and  I "
""
and I would see him ere I go.  He must be  king after  me. And  I would send  
"Lucie Colmer,4339417559851,09-01-2000
"
single clear voice rose in song. 
way akin and not alien: they could reach one another's  minds. Gollum raised 
table. You follow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up 
couldn't say no to that.' 
""
the 
"####-buttress of Ephel D®ath. Winging  the heavy air in a straight flight a crow, "
"more; and it seemed to them as  they stood upon the wall that the wind died,  "
but  they  shall  not! Not  while Faramir  is Captain.  He  leads now in all 
firelight stood a ring  of hobbits  that had crept  up out  of  the shadows. 
"I  most fear, a league between  Orthanc  and  the Dark Tower, I led forth my "
"ale,  and  bacon  to  toast  in  the  embers  of  the  fire.  After  that  they  slept,  for  their "
     `Strider!' said Frodo. `You seem to have a lot of names.' 
 
"contrived we cannot guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy "
"     Slowly  the  light  grew, until it  was clearer than it yet had been. A "
     Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo 
"     Then Treebeard  said farewell to  each of  them  in turn, and  he bowed "
 
amazement of  sensible folk he was sometimes  seen far  from home walking in 
"Anduin was like a  garden, and  the  Mountains  of Shadow  were veiled in  a "
"     Again she fled, but swift he came. "
"Peyton Gardner,4041595936816,28-11-1975
"
resolved on this.' 
been chased for two days by Black Riders.' 
"Bombur,  and  Thorin  were  in  another.  Dwalin  and  Balin  had  swarmed  up  a  tall "
could  hit  a  bird's  eye  in  the  dark. So  they  simply  stopped  dead  and  sat  down  and 
     Inside in the  hall there  was piled a large assortment of packages and 
time to time. 
expected to see the small distant  figure of  a horseman on  the ridge  dark 
for a few years  under the dominion of  the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen 
"out of deep thought, turned to him and smiled. "
"the  world,  but  came  northward  from the lower Anduin, whither  it was, I "
"dull toil.  Now tall  and straight he stood,  and his  eyes were blue as  he "
"Meriadoc the hobbit, and the great  grey steed  Windfola  made little of the "
"something  that will  show  its  badness quick, well,  better me  than  you, "
away 
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they 
more fiercely for that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He  leapt 
"and its  mighty  men of old.  But most of the time, especially  on this last "
"counsel:  in the  end  you must leave  them and the River, and turn  west -or "
"     'All the same,' said Frodo,  'even if  Bilbo could  not kill  Gollum, I "
"     'Whips,  knives, and  clubs, enough for their dirty  work:  that's  all "
"It is fashioned in  an elven-script of  Eregion, for they have no letters in  "
nearer. Follow me!' 
"     'No, master!  Mr. Bilbo gave it  to you,  and  it goes with his  silver  "
"     Then some being shamed by  his mercy  overcame their fear and  went on, "
     With  great  efforts  they  checked  the boats and slowly brought  them 
"     And Frodo when he saw her come glimmering in the evening, with stars on "
"and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry "
"what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannot "
"     'Well,  here  we are,' sneered Grishnbkh. 'Fine  leadership! I hope the "
"as a pale shrouded  figure it loomed over the Hill. For a moment it wavered,  "
"Mellie Godley,4041372343343,16-05-2000
"
"Nicolis McDool,4041591884942617,31-05-1993
"
"was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go. "
"Over rock and under tree, "
"Hobbits  had ever  seen or  sailed  upon the Sea, and fewer  still had  ever  "
"     But suddenly he too stumbled forward with a cry of bitter pain, and his "
Frodo. 'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.' 
heavy to breathe. When lights appeared Sam  rubbed his eyes: he  thought his 
"     red then it rolled, roaring water: "
"     'Alas! I  Fear  we cannot  stay here longer,'  said  Aragorn. He looked "
"answered  the wizard. 'Hobbits,  I suppose, have forgotten  them, even those  "
"pain came upon Pippin, and his mind fell away into a great darkness. "
"     When the  Dwarf had  a  small bright blaze going, the three  companions "
"     'I  saw something,' said Merry; 'or  I thought  I did  -  away westwards "
eyes. 
     It was  a  cold grey  day near the end of  December.  The East Wind was 
"now freed by his valour, and nothing binders his return. And any that wish can go "
"above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy. "
and got clean out of the hole. That's something to think about! ' 
""
against  a great tree-trunk.  'We  can  at  least follow the  course of this 
"Butterbur angrily, 'you ought to pay  for all the damage yourselves and  not "
parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? ' 
"     'You have found it,' said Jomer. 'When you crossed the fords yonder you  "
the box  out and showed it to  the  other Travellers (for  so they were  now 
Entwash and cross into my own land.' 
hissing whisper. 
"terror, and was convinced that they were  being hunted, that  their approach "
"`But I hope I  do  get  back some  day. If  what  I've  seen turns out true, "
Rhosgobel. Radagast was not there; and they had  returned over the high pass 
"`is some  herbs and roots,  especially taters -- not to mention bread. Herbs "
"every step.  What's the hobbit going  to  do  with it,  we wonders,  yes  we "
"Gamgee did not look much older, but he was a little deafer. "
"must hide now, yes in day.' "
""
"""Never  you  mind.  I  was  finding  things  out,  as  usual;  and  a  nasty  dangerous "
"""Thorin!""  he  cried  aloud.  ""What  next? We  are  armed,  but what  good  has  any "
door and slammed it again. 
"a second  time. If he had  questioned  you, then and there, almost certainly "
"fitted to love, I suppose: you must start somewhere and have some roots, and "
""
"that he was attacked on this hill-top,  but with what result  I cannot tell. "
"     'Frodo  has been  touched  by the weapons of  the Enemy,' said Strider, "
"face at the top of the  bank, with  a broken sword under you. The horse  was "
a  moment in thought -- `not unless there is any promise you can make that I  
"shall have  a good chance  of slipping through, unseen  by any eyes  on  the "
"or guided by fate, and it pierced his right hand. He dr opped the  sword  and "
"cruel,  with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed him he  whined "
     With the bone he boned from its owner. 
down.  The  land  became  drier and more barren;  but  mists and vapours lay 
"####-     At the water -side Aragorn  remained, watching the  bier. while  Legolas "
"sword  rang faintly, and glinted a  little in the light of the fire away  to "
the Wise  has been  filled at  last. Yet too slowly. For  the Enemy has been 
 
####-hear  the proofs? And I would ask this  also. What of Saruman? He is learned 
"a new friend, he would.' "
"them when they were in want. And still my other claims remain unanswered."" "
"Clemmy Ashbe,4017955871637,05-07-1988
"
"trapped and held; and how  ever  since he has been persuaded  from afar, and "
"""And what brought you back in the nick of time?"" "
"them  with cold blades of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam "
"Ryley Wear,4324101348727352,03-11-1984
"
dawned bright and fair again. 
this last word so  loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could. 
"wound  up on to the top  of a grassy knoll,  now grey under  the pale starry "
of  the Galadhrim!  And let not your heart be  sad though night  must follow 
"Galadriel,' he murmured  nodding his head  mournfully. He looked up and gave "
"me, were this only a woodman's cot, if I bore now any sword but And®ril.' "
"     `So  that's your advice  is it,' said Sam, 'that  we  should go another  "
"     'Don't do that!'  said  Gandalf, sitting down. 'Do be  careful of  that "
"My Bruckental,4450844651760769,13-11-1986
"
"was  a  turning  point  in  his  career,  but  he  did  not  know  it.  He  put  the  ring  in  his "
"guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that "
"thought only for a  season, or for a few lives  of Men, or for a passing age "
the man who waited on the hobbits.  
failed.' 
would break it to them. 
"     'You are grieved, daughter,' said Thjoden. 'What has happened? Tell me, "
firework displays  - they now belonged to the legendary past. 
nearer to the Mountain than the far edge of the Long Lake now-a-days. 
"""Something  strange  is  happening,""  said  Thorin.  ""The  time  has  gone  for  the "
"through  the door, and the orcs themselves were  afraid and fell  silent. It "
     'Now for it! Now  for the last  gasp!' said Sam as he  struggled to his 
"from Gandalf. D®nhere,  chieftain of  the  folk of Harrowdale, was at  their "
"already  bound  in  cords, wound about him from ankle to  shoulder,  and the  "
back to his golden couch to sleep – and to gather new strength. 
"Padgett Joska,4559870857530,26-10-1978
"
"Sibylla Duetschens,4028882561712,04-10-1984
"
"the ashes of the watch-fire  near the river -bank, and then  began to retrace "
"ominous, there echoed in  the hollow land  beyond the mighty horns  and drums "
     'And how do you suppose that either of  our friends came to have a hand 
"     'Too often have I heard of duty,' she cried. 'But am I not of the House "
     Chapter 3   Three is Company   
halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!' 
all unguarded. Yet six thousands at the  least shall ride behind me. For say 
"simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.' "
""
night it is only to look at the stars. But did I hear someone ask where poor  
"     Aragorn  was  silent for a moment. 'Three days,' he murmured, 'and  the "
"others went away north. All  that day they were busy, out of  sight. Most of "
my meaning.' 
"already  old. I  fear  that your  heart  spoke truly,  Legolas: it is thrice "
"away, than he was aware of a cha nge in his burden. As it drew near the great "
"Renata Hanington,4041376997722,25-08-1983
"
####-off with a grin and a wink. 
"Gondor , as there were once  upon a time,  they  say! For  it is said in  old "
"ended. A  nice  pickle  they were  all  in  now:  all  neatly  tied  up  in  sacks, with  three "
"without straying from the path. That you MUST NOT do, for any reason. ""That is "
hobbit-sense: he  knew in the core of his heart that he was not large enough 
folk that came out to  stare at the  'get-up' of the travellers did not seem 
"sheltered spot,  and camp once more; and perhaps another  day will show us a "
"have come into the valley under the cover of dusk along both banks of the river."" "
"there was nothing for it: he had to put the  things on, or go  naked.  There "
"constrained to  come often to his glass for inspection and instruction,  and "
"bitter white winters were  now only  a grandfather's tale. So,  though there "
abroad. 
yess.' 
"so fortified has thought of that."" "
"green coomb, a great bay in  the mountains,  out of which  a gorge opened in  "
danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious.  
"Scot Le febre,4017959726902,22-06-1978
"
"some jest or other with the little guests, and that it was over. "
"Morning  passed,  afternoon  came;  but  in  all  the  silent waste  there was  no  sign "
driven on the  shoals.' Even as  he  spoke  Frodo felt the  keel beneath him 
"####-It lies behind stars and under hills, "
"lantern-beam. Their  slow feet echoed as  they walked down,  down, until  at "
"been allowed  or arranged, and well known in the Dark Tower. And in any case "
"fire, and now Mindolluin stood black against a burning smoulder flecked  with "
will be to get our boats and baggage   to the old  portage-way. We have found 
away;  but  I  was  told that  this  Baggins would be going by  the  name of 
coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to Lune. Yet they kept  a few words of their 
"     'Well I don't  know,' said Sam  thoughtfully. He believed he  had  once "
"gorgyn  in woods, hate orc-folk. You hate gorgyn too. We help as we can. Wild "
"put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later Master of Buckland), and since he "
"Cordell Tummons,4292979504957204,12-07-1975
"
fell;  and  still  no  arrow  hindered  Smaug  or  hurt  him  more  than  a  fly  from  the 
"very  edge  of  the  borderland  of  the Wild,  and  to  the  ford  beneath  the  steep  bank, "
"him, climbing the long slope, until  they  came out upon the  top. It  was a  "
####-a fear seized Pippin that Merry would die. 
"use the  Lady's glass. Keep it safe  for me, Sam. I  have nowhere to keep it "
"""Dazzlingly  marvellous!  Perfect!  Flawless!  Staggering!""  exclaimed  Bilbo "
Hill of Erech. 
####-     Shadowfax  whinnied as Pippin  entered the stable and  turned his head. 
uneasily. Still I watched and I waited. 
"eat. It is a sore trial for a hobbit, that. No doubt you will think I should "
we go south under the naked sky. 
"     The  sun was now  climbing, and the  mists in the  vale below  had been "
"broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of  them, running wildly along the "
"sight.  But  before the king could speak,  the  small smoke-breathing figure "
"Modestine Fetherstone,4041375771964128,26-03-1988
"
 
"help  of  the  Lake-people,  but  being  of  the  kind  that  easily  catches  such  disease  he "
"grimly.  'And I  mean just  that, Mr. Frodo. I mean plain ordinary rest, and "
"####-dreadful cry a nd a great shock,  and a deep echoing boom. Forcing himself on "
"the road  above, where it passes through  the cloven way. The road may pass, "
"of white light;  and behind it ran small shadowy forms  waving flames,  that "
""
stumbling through a barren  stony country.  They did not dare  to  take  the 
""
"wise but unlearned,  writing no books  but  singing many  songs,  after  the "
"     `Now, therefore, things  shall be  openly spoken that  have been hidden "
We've come the wrong way.' 
"     'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,'  said Gimli.  'I have done "
old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered  and trickled. They did not 
"Torrance Gallamore,4041375880070619,25-03-1985
"
"seemed to be asleep. ""I thought I had  fallen into  deep  water,"" he says to "
"Ardath Adkins,4017957234321,06-10-2001
"
"still days to go.  All would long ago have been spent, if they had not dared "
"was  peeping  through into the road,  after the S.-B.s  had  passed, and was "
"stood seemed empty and drear, as if a dream had passed. "
suddenly.  There came  a  long rolling  of great  drums like thunder in  the 
####-Book III  
"Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.' "
"all the inns;  and everything except Rules got  shorter and  shorter, unless "
"something like this  at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction "
"     'Maybe, lord,' said D®nhere. 'Yet the same, or  another like to  it,  a  "
on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways;  
"of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark climbing pinewoods.  Soon "
"sprang  up, and drew  Sting from its sheath. With his left hand he drew back  "
Chapter 3. Mount Doom 
"Bondie Blundin,4041378011555,26-08-2000
"
thatched  eaves above. Before  they had  finished  breakfast the  clouds had 
"walled causeway, the  road came in from  the fords and bridges  of Osgiliath "
"those that stood near  that they heard a sound of answering  horns, as if it "
"was now over.  Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for  "
"""I  tell you,"" he  said,  in  an  effort  to  remain  loyal  to his  friends  and  to keep his "
"in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said. "
"Dov Althorpe,4041591502711,28-06-1994
"
"in its sheath, tightened his belt, and went on. "
     And let the clouds go sailing by. 
"     For  many  miles the red eye  seemed  to  stare at  them as they  fled, "
you.' 
And  how it draws  one to itself! Have I  not  felt it?  Even now  my  heart 
Saruman  is  still in his tower. There was a noise in the  night like a wind 
"Dark  Tower  were at present Frodo's  only  protection, and if they were set "
bent  over it. Then with  a rush it leaped  across the fissure.  The  flames 
"A  tall  man  stood  forward,  dark  of  hair  and  grim  of  face,  and  he  cried:  ""Hail "
"Consolata Burmaster,4041591375985,11-08-1996
"
"     He lived  alone, as Bilbo had done; but he  had  a  good  many friends, "
And®ril and  held it up glittering  in the sun. 'You shall  not  be sheathed 
considerable  wealth that he  had brought back. How  much or  how  little he 
"from the Halfling that is with us; for he was in the riding of the king, and "
that I know. Though surely there are many perils in the world.' 
finger. He  was kneeling in clear  sunlight before  the  high  seat. A black  
"outside,  without  a  hat,  walking-stick  or  say  money,  or  anything  that  he  usually "
"Min-Rimmon, Erelas, Nardol. But  their fires  were  quenched. All  the lands "
"Marybelle Winterbourne,4041595111031326,08-07-1992
"
"Pascale Alflat,4017953590963115,07-07-1985
"
     A laugh put an end to them. There was a surly hobbit lounging over  the 
"heavy shadow  had deepened,  and all hearts in the City were oppressed.  Far "
"strong: battalions of Orcs of the Eye, and  countless companies of Men of  a  "
"Drusi Sandeman,4586830488726914,29-12-1991
"
"     As Frodo clung upon his back, arms loosely about his neck, legs clasped "
"Rogerio Brewerton,4097067741351139,09-08-1986
"
"heard  no other strange thing,  sa ve one: the voice of the river beside them "
"and silent cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill. There the river, after winding a wide loop "
"`He thinks I need keeping in  order.  But it  seems impossible, somehow,  to  "
"here too the vigilance had failed, and treachery had yielded up the Tower to  "
"'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?' "
Legolas. `At  first  we were  weary and  danger  was  too close  behind  and 
Helm rang out. 
"wide awake  and glaring. How we laughed! She'd  forgotten him, maybe, but "
the Dead needed no longer any weapon but fear. None would withstand them. 
"Germain Bartle,4041593322688,14-08-1994
"
rouse them. I am sure he means to  try.  Bu t they don't like  being  roused. 
"Neile Mickan,4041597495704,21-11-1977
"
"     Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen! "
"marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he lent to a  "
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping. 
"no sign of road or track, but Shadowfax did not stay or falter. "
over the brow of the  hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. At a  
"confederates, not if aught may be  learned from  ancient tales. Do I not hit "
"next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.  "
"landing-place, before you set off downstream.' "
"latest. I will return as soon  as I can; and I will follow  you,  if  I find "
at her dragging legs. Then he fell to the ground. 
"has done more, and  the stout legs of the Westfold-men  marching through the "
"walking-song (though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed). "
is at hand; and  there will be rich reward for those that  aided it.  As the 
towards the  causeway not  a  long while back. He  was a funny  customer and 
"The spiders saw the sword, though I don't suppose they knew what it was, and "
in mist and cloud;  yet  the Horse-lords  had formerly  kept  many  herds and  
peril.' 
"Seems he wanted to own everything himself, and  then order other folk about. "
"""Mutton yesterday, mutton today, and blimey, if it don't look like mutton again "
"     Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them. "
"     With that he seized a great horn from Guthlbf his banner -bearer, and he "
####-     O stars that in the Sunless Year 
someone  loose hereabouts  as is more dangerous than any other  damned rebel 
he sank  beside  a tree and plucked a black -feathered shaft  from  his side. 
"     Frodo looked  and saw, still at some  distance, a  hill of many  mighty "
"Ithilien was still for the most par t in our keeping.  As you know, that city "
"     'Perhaps,' said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's guess. 'Perhaps;  "
without  a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such  are these. 
"Maribel Simion,4017954116223190,25-04-1997
"
     For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the  
"Tailor Lightbody,4017955433347,09-05-1984
"
 
"Annamaria Negri,4041371776722264,26-05-1979
"
"     To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying, "
"or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge. "
was 
the ground and whimpered. 
"plundered other plunderers, or come on the remnants of old robberies in some hold "
"disappeared. He simply  vanished, as  if he had  gone slap through the floor  "
a little while. Farewell!' 
"in  black, and black was his lofty helm;  yet this  was  no Ringwraith but a  "
corner of  a  cold hard  flagstone. Then he  remembered where he was and lay 
the morning. 
"he was found he  had already been  there long,  and was on his  way back. On "
"Viola Moreman,4935959063051,21-09-1978
"
too. But see here: when were you ordered out? ' 
the white rind of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote lakes.  
"     `If  Gandalf  would go before us with  a bright  flame, he might melt a  "
"     He embraced the hobbits then, after the manner of his people, stooping, "
Then  at  last  they  said  good-bye  to  their  ponies  and  turned  their  heads  for 
"Tedi Channon,4041595985920,04-10-1976
"
all  that  each had  known and seen of  him came clear before their minds. As 
"in  the Shire in Bilbo's  days it  was, as a rule, only the richest and  the "
them. I  have been  trying to discover  something of  their movements; but I 
 
     'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully. 
land; but slowly and with much  stumbling the two hobbits  toiled on hour by 
"dinner  had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter -in-law, Esmeralda: "
suddenly Pippin looked up and  saw  that  the  sun was still shining and the 
"     Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon? "
and leering mouth. 
 Prologue   
"     'And earlier, it is to  be hoped,' said Gandalf. 'For I have not ridden "
are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These  tree -roots would  do them good.' 
"and I can see we found  truesilver,  and  later the  word wellforged and then  "
     After a while he looked back and found that he had already climbed some 
"wide River, and  on up the long straight road that in the high days had been "
####- 
"and  there was  a grey mist on the Barrow-downs southwards, and  a deep veil "
"water,  and  washed  up.  Then  he  had  a  nice  little  breakfast  in  the  kitchen  before "
"opened  on a broad road,  the outer parapet of which ran upon the brink of a  "
"shadow of the Balrog,' he ended in a whisper. "
"the  thought  came  to him that  this slimy creature might prove false, even "
"spirits  sank  at  his  grave  words,  and  they  all  felt  that  the  adventure  was  far more "
so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give 
"     There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching years, "
"without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and  yet  you knew that "
at once  that the darkness was slowly giving way:  a pale greenish light was 
"again in  herb and leaf. Legolas took a deep breath,  like one that drinks a  "
"about, and  worse than Orcs.' Then  returning  quickly to his  long habit of "
seemed small and far-away and unimportant. while  Gluin had much to tell  of 
thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.' 
that long solemn hall; but between the pillars there stood  a silent company 
"the  sun was sinking, falling behind the  Misty Mountains;  shadows  reached "
"Kriste Arias,4176195432565396,12-03-1995
"
and floating away upon the breeze. 
""
"     'Thus we  meet again, though  all the hosts of Mordor lay between  us,' "
that  road. They have passed  on  to the  Black Gate; but  more may  follow.  
Mountains and the White. 
sunset were veiled in cloud. 
"Thelma Piggott,4017952287983964,12-06-1991
"
####-pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.' 
"the sharpest ears and eyes. These ran forward, as swift as weasels in the dark,  and "
"dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was  white, nearly as white as the "
"Meriadoc. 'For,' he said, 'long have I stood by them and at first they spoke "
"poor  Bilbo,  who  never  had  anything  to  do  with  the  water  if  he  could  help  it.  I "
"the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course, no uniforms "
strip  under the face of a low  cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall 
body.' 
"Caras Galadhon,  and passing through  a high green  hedge they  came into an "
"a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there "
"Spencer Korneichik,4383577989052,26-05-1997
"
by fighting.' 
"Hynda Stancliffe,4041593737869,27-11-1981
"
thickened from within with  layer on layer of evil  growth. The blade scored 
 
the fight could be found. They went on. Already the eastward sky was turning 
"beside him, cutting  him off from light and from regret. And he had promised "
"     But no  day  came, only a dead brown twilight. In the East  there was a  "
tightening  cords;  clammy fingers were feeling for  his throat.  Then sharp 
"the Shire lengthened  they  spoke  less and  less with  the  Elves, and grew "
     A new road or a secret gate; 
"     `Yes,  I can walk,' said Frodo, getting up slowly. 'I am not hurt  Sam. "
"could not easily be opened at the end without a deal of noise, nor could they easily "
red  in the last  light of the vanished Sun. One  by one  white stars sprang 
what is the  good even of  food  and  drink under this creeping shadow? What 
"Tabbi Fishburn,4041371970120,25-01-1975
"
"a great fissure, out of which the  red glare came, now leaping u p, now dying "
"days Elves still  at times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision "
""
     Together  with  extracts from  Books of  Lore  translated by  Bilbo  in 
that was  ever  used for such a purpose. I can still  remember  ten score of 
""
wanderer touched little by the perils he had passed through. Now  he was one 
     'What?  In riddles?'  sa id  Gandalf. 'No!  For I was talking  aloud  to 
meet  an old  slow wicked  fat-bodied spider who had remained behind to guard the 
"     Merry could  not speak, bu t wept anew. 'Forgive me,  lord,' he  said at "
"must have seemed very  hasty  to  Treebeard, for Gandalf was in a tremendous "
     'How long will that be?' said Butterbur.  'I'll  not deny we  should be 
that the horsemen slew and burned all  upon the field of battle; but he does 
"Roll-roll-roll-roll, "
As  they  worked  the  ravens  brought  them  constant  tidings.  In  this  way  they 
"Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host,  both of the Riders and of the "
came to Bag End. Then he  brought in a lot o' dirty-looking Men  to  build a  
"Willette Copley,4411137550401,12-03-1975
"
Elbereth protect you!' 
"before us; and then we rested a while. But soon Aragorn  arose, saying: ""Lo!  "
is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I don't suppose they are far 
"gone.  As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not, there "
"him. As a father you shall be to me, you said.' But his will made no answer, "
In  two  days  going  they  rowed  right up  the Long Lake and passed out  into  the 
"####-     No stain yet on the Moon was seen, "
"seemed,  such as  I have  never seen before,' said  Aragorn. `It  was both a  "
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he 
Then  the  Master  hesitated  and  looked  from  one  to  the  other.  The  Elvenking 
"     'Very  well,' said Ugl®k. 'Leave them  to me then! No killing,  as I've "
stood there. The  last glint of the morning sun  on  spear and helm twinkled 
"     `I  hear  all kinds of  news,  from  over the Mountains, and out of the "
""
geography. 
"it,  great shapes  far away upon the bank of the river; but  what they are I "
     'Good!  That's  settled. Three cheers  for  Captain Frodo and company!' 
these evil-smelling fens?  ' 
"last, as far as they  could judge, they had reached the middle of the stream "
"with  stones. When all  were safe  within, Jomer turned: 'I thank you, Gimli "
"     'I am sorry,' said  Frodo.  'But I am frightened; and I do not feel any "
"sweeping stroke,  drawing  the  bitter  edge  swiftly  across  a  ladder  of "
"black fall  behind them.  And the steps  were narrow,  spaced unevenly,  and "
business and talking big. And there's worse than  that: there's a  few as do 
"     I'll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again: "
"the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as "
side. 
He  scowled  so  angrily  at Gloin  that  the  dwarf  huddled  back  in  his  chair;  and 
who was now behind him. 
"Middle-earth have in  some measure gained,  though with sorrow. But all that "
"it, its long arms and legs almost bone -white and bone-thin: no flesh worth a  "
 
"     'I cannot say yet,' Aragorn answered. 'As for the king, he will  go  to "
western shore. Under  the  shadow Of bushes leaning  out  over the water they 
going to be more funny than I thought. Let's go!' 
"the Puddifoots of  Stock, and most of  the  inhabitants of  the Marish, were "
Gollum and bite him quick! ' 
ill-founded. For my  hope  was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was 
"At last he interrupted them. ""I am sure we are very unsafe here,"" he said, ""and "
"Rani Gratton,4041372079228,19-07-1998
"
"     From Wilderland to Western shore, "
spoken word: such was the elvish way with all good beasts.  Gimli was lifted 
"There seemed  to be  some understanding   between Dernhelm  and Elfhelm,  "
wrapped  themselves in a cloak and blanket and  slept. The  hobbits lay in a  
     'Against  delay. Against the  way that seems easier. Against refusal of 
got the bath-water hot?' 
"borne ever  southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank, and they could "
"scorched by fire,  and in the midst of it  he  found  a pile  of charred and "
"Audry Petteford,4041599335924340,03-07-1994
"
"Eda Casseldine,4041598617975,31-12-1980
"
"####-to remember why it was that I,  not he, was in Ithilien. On  one occasion at "
"Dulciana Ullock,4017950689026,26-11-1981
"
"seemed  that the trees became  taller, darker,  and  thicker. There  was  no "
####-There  seemed  to  be  no  trees  and  no  valleys  and  no  hills  to  break  the  ground  in 
"they spoke  the languages  of Men,  after their own fashion,  and liked  and "
"shall  take. For I will ride  from the  Burg  by mountain paths, not  by the "
"at. But Bard will remember me, and it is Bard I particularly want to see."" "
now  but for the stony noise  of quick  waters. Smokes and steams drifted in  
"     'That  was  the  sound of a  hammer, or I have never heard  one,'  said "
alliance: neither  wanted  the Enemy to get the Ring;  both  wished to  keep 
sprung up on Balin's  tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thirteen 
"Ring,  the Ruling Ring, for  that was  made by Sauron himself. There is only "
"Catlaina Ronan,4041599536547,01-09-1982
"
####-we leave Bree.' 
"""All  of  them  at  once,""  said  Bilbo.  ""And  a  very  fine  morning  for  a  pipe  of "
"out-walls.  Slowly the dark must have crept  on  him,  even as he fought and "
"content to  listen,  only occasionally venturing  to  make an exclamation of "
"     The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought  by  him, but "
"All eyes were turned southwards, and soon a murmur rose: 'There is dust away "
"when  the fragrance  of athelas stole through the room, like  the  scent  of "
"on the roads, that  won't do no harm,' he said. 'But  we  don't want no more "
"'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?' "
     'And what else?' said Frodo. 
     `Master said so. Master says:  Bring  us to the  Gate. So  good Smjagol 
"     'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't  "
"Martin O'Shesnan,4041377999982,16-02-1997
"
them plain what had happened. 
"but a little and it will fail, to the ruin  of  all. Yet hope remains  while "
"far off. ""It will not be  long now,""  thought Bilbo, ""before the goblins win the Gate, "
turn.  Last  he  turned  to Legolas.  'So  you  have  come  all the way from 
these things upon the open road!' 
"with Bilbo, and  some of them  had hardly ever  been in Hobbiton before,  as "
"felt the wind blowing in their faces, and they caught the glimmer of morning  "
""
that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples.' Gimli bowed low. 
####- 
"     'But I am the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them "
"`Come now, Gollum  or Smjagol if  you wish, tell  me of this other way,  and "
"the water,  I cannot guess; it used  to  be swift  and noisy.  Come! We must  "
they  looked  down  surprised  to  see  trees  below  them  and  running  water  at  the 
"while the travellers remained there; but the next morning they got up early, "
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this  cold 
shields  as  cradles  or  dish-covers;  and  dragons  are  comfortably  far-off  (and 
"Carlynne Yurenev,4017959322226515,11-12-1977
"
"like  trees  of  the  forest.  Whether  it  was  magic  or  not,  it  seemed  to  Bilbo  that he "
"took  all  their  wealth  for  himself.  Probably,  for  that  is  the  dragons'  way,  he  has "
"conspiracy;  and  as we were serious, too,  and meant business,  we have not  "
""
"Tani Cambridge,4041599747509093,17-02-1982
"
""
     At that sound  the bent shape  of the king sprang suddenly  erect. Tall 
view was blocked  by the base of the great turret that stood at the  back of 
were no less laborious.  Then when the 'end' had  at last  been reached  the 
""
"     `If  it  is a worse road  than the  Redhorn Gate,  then it must be evil "
"pot or for Shelob, if you don't take  care. Carrion! Is that all you know of "
"     Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in. It was dark and  hot, and a  "
the dark. 
"     So the days slipped away, as  each morning dawned  bright and fair, and "
"Pepita Curness,4924981717833558,01-08-2001
"
delight of the living tree itself. 
nothing else to do with u s-with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foes 
"believe it, he's  now one of the most famous  people  in all  the lands, and "
"that purpose,' said  Gandalf.  "
had  dropped a stone into the quiet slumber  of the river -valley and  set up 
light came there might be long delay before the trail was found again.' 
""
"'Now  at last  the hour has come that you have wished  for, Frodo,' he said. "
"to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving.' "
"Xenia Jorck,4406930106153,17-08-1992
"
"said.  'They're  coming along the  road from Waymeet, but a good many  stray "
####-wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly 
were already shining in the sky. 
"     `I  had  not named you,' said Elrond  smiling. `But I do so now.  Come!  "
""
"     Standing upon the  rim of the ruined circle,  they saw all round  below "
"Karilynn Andryszczak,4017959347048,06-12-2000
"
"He  was  very  much  alarmed,  as  well  as  disgusted;  he  wished  himself  a  hundred "
"door, on which all their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a scouting expedition to spy "
so that the besiegers would have to encircle the whole mountain; and for that they 
while the light lasted. 
"Derward Thatcham,4041372908212380,25-04-2000
"
did not much like the miller. 'There isn't no  call to go ta lking of pushing 
"Cris Crichley,4626116709237,03-06-1988
"
"lost?'  Then he called aloud  to the others, and all the company stopped and "
"few but elvish eyes would have marked them, until they  were close  at hand. "
"quickly have  been overcome by  that splinter, which you bore  for seventeen "
"said Gandalf. 'Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms again, tell me of "
of the  ores each step became more  difficult. Before they  even reached the 
against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said struck him like 
"     'Well,' said Pippin.  'I  have known of  him all my short  life, as you  "
though I  daresay  the beasts knew their business and  would not really have 
reason  why the  Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the  world it 
     'Well I  am staggered!' said  Pippin.  'Of all the ends to  our journey 
"     The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quie t "
valiant!' 
eat  them;  neither  does  he  hunt  or  eat  wild  animals.  He  keeps  hives  and  hives  of 
"been  caught  in a net of warring duties that  you did not weave. But think, "
"turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached "
down upon their knees.  
"Annabell Bollans,4041375362339094,09-12-1993
"
"took the chance, sir.' "
"fire, and  waking  brought  him no comfort.  Still  his sleep  had not  been "
"Riders, and would certainly be  frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland "
"Allys Ossulton,4017950147512,14-02-1986
"
"home  today  (or  tonight, or whatever it is), I do believe. If Oin and Gloin have not "
"order. It seemed in any case a  wise course for the moment, since this  foray "
steeds are coming towards us!' 
The king of friend and kin has need. 
westward 
himself. He capered  about on the table; and when he came  a second  time to 
"were slain  save those who fled  to die, or to drown  in the red foam of the "
since Men changed the language that they learned of elves in the days when all the 
"     Sam fell on his knees,  trembling. 'Get  up, Sam!' said Gandalf. I have "
be hoped not.' 
tall  tree  with  wolves  all  round  on  the  ground  below.  He  gathered  the  huge 
Ya hoy! 
     To  the  discomfiture  of  the Shirriffs  Frodo  and his companions all 
immediately flew away.  
"Amalea Springthorpe,4222901104899,08-05-1986
"
"energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. 'Some folk have all the luck,' they "
"Timmi Leaming,4581561486261928,25-04-1978
"
"boughs are  laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the  wood is golden,  "
"Frodo, `but it suddenly came back to me. I had  quite  forgotten it. It came "
"####-gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they "
"     'The Orcs will  be doubly on their  guard since then, and the prisoners "
"gleamed,  cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow "
"you, and what is your name? I am ten  years a lready, and  shall soon be five "
small hill under which they had been sheltering. it was crowned  with a knot  
     'What are you  doing here?'  said Gandalf. 'Is it not a law in the City 
but still sufficient  for their desperate case. Yet that was now a  day ago. 
"folk stand  up for our rights, they drag him off to the Lockholes. They took  "
across the road at each end of the  village. When  the Shirriffs  came up to 
"deal of telling anyway. They stayed long in that good house, fourteen days at least, "
staggered up. In its  other hand it  held a broad-headed spear  with a short 
"not  though  he  possessed  the Ring so  long, almost  as far back as he can "
"folding its fingered webs, it gave a croaking cry, and settled upon the body "
"Odille Spohrmann,4041590241410,02-12-1980
"
"trees that  stood silently about them, rank upon rank, until they faded away "
"Berti Houdhury,4041598844822268,26-06-1986
"
"     'If we  reach the Fire in  that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! ' he "
think somehow that Gandalf would have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand if there 
banks began to rise and grow stony.  Soon they were passing through a  hilly 
"hopes end. Therefore I  send  thee what I have  made  for  thee. Fare  well, "
"Valaree Pursey,4041595660318520,29-12-1988
"
"hailed  the  dwarves,  shouting  and  paying. Those  that were  nearest  came  tumbling "
"move hand to weapon, the other  quailed and  gave back as if menaced with  a  "
"Frodo, almost nose to nose, and sniffed at him.  His pale eyes were shining. "
"trespassing. If we meet him, I'll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry's,  "
means. The last thing written is in a  trailing  scrawl of elf-letters: they 
old Grnma!  Always beaten and cursed. How  I hate him!  I wish I could leave 
"But this will not help us much, I fear, for it passes our skill in these days to guess "
Faramir awakes. But it is my counsel that Gandalf should rule us  all in the 
and  busied  themselves  with  the  final  preparations  for  a late supper. 
"alone, apart from any  other evidence.' 'And  when  did you discover  that?' "
"Currey Karran,4041591614599,28-04-1993
"
"     The old that is strong does not wither, "
"they  delayed  shutting  the  door-it  seemed  a  desperate  plan,  for  no  one  knew "
     Now she led Merry to a booth among the lodges of the king's  guard  and 
You would be slain before you saw them.' 
"Dewitt Braniff,4041370407490838,18-06-1990
"
at length to  a door in the rearward wall of the sixth circle. Fen Hollen it 
"and  Sam. The sun  was  already behind the  western hills, and the light was "
whisked behind a tree-trunk when  I drew  nigh and went up aloft as swift as 
"much  annotation, and  many  corrections, especially  of  names,  words, and "
men murmur  that  their sorrows are due  to  the dwarves; for  they are homeless and 
light  leapt  from  their  eyes.  In  the  gloom  the  great  dwarf  gleamed  like  gold  in  a 
away to a different place. The idea came to him to lead the furious spiders further 
"Carlie Bessant,4017959904458676,25-02-1975
"
"so  they  say: personally  I never  really  felt  like one-but I am an honest one, I hope, "
the  anvil have  done  to you. I still marvel  that  you are  alive at all.' 
"then. `He's dead! ' he said. 'Not asleep, dead! ' And  as he  said it, as if "
"south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and Umbar, the nearest  of  their realms,  "
search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under  the care  of Tom Bombadil for a  
"Chaunce Trayford,4385459019374110,25-08-1978
"
"walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked  beside him, stroking his beard and "
green  bank near to the very point  of the Tongue  the  Lady Galadriel stood 
"Gustie Harwood,4017954165455446,30-11-1995
"
     As I tramp through the grass; 
"leave so soon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one day  - if I get a chance.' "
"Boulders,  too,  at  times  came  galloping  down  the  mountain-sides,  let  loose  by "
explain your sudden vanishment.' 
""
     They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the 
"of  stones  they  drove  at  the  spiders  on  the  left,  and  burst  through  the  ring.  Away "
"Leisha Berthon,4041596949640023,13-11-1993
"
"     'Aye, you do indeed,' said Gimli, looking them up and down over the top  "
     forbid to those that dwell therein. 
have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me!  ' 
"fleeting  glimpse  of  it,  peering  back  over  the  edge  of the  eastward "
"friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits  were included, and present by "
and they stood now together once more upon the walls of  the City and looked 
"if you feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid at once, or it "
quoted. 
that he must choose his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the 
"places almost disappeared, and was  blocked  with  many fallen  stones.  The "
"should say, after a bee-autiful sleep. I'll show you."" "
kindred.' 
"     'For so we reckon Men in our lore, calling them the High, or Men of the "
"     `O no, not empty!  ' whispered Gollum. `It seems empty, but it isn't, O "
"into the turret. Here was another  dreadful  choice, and he  had  no time to "
     'Hill?' suggested Pippin. 'Shelf? Step?' suggested Merry. 
himself  and  for  the  one that  will  not return.'  And  ever  men  looked 
smallest child  in  Hobbiton. They were so deep in  the doings  of  the Four 
"unless they are killed), and never enjoy a brass ring of it. Indeed they hardly know "
"riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled  in  my yard, and they're "
"Caitlin Everall,4041592032059130,14-07-1994
"
"Allsun Mote,4041370848155842,26-03-1988
"
quiet voice  Denethor bade them lay warm coverlets on Faramir's bed and take 
more 
"treacherously, but its keeper never  abandons it. At most he  plays with the "
"out  or  to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but  was itself "
""
"you have learned sense and manners!"" "
     in summers that have been; 
"things forsook his borders; and the city in the valley was dead, and  no Elf "
"I, we must endure with patience the hours of waiting.' "
"forward, leading the company, and where the road from  the Hornburg  met the "
with a jump like a  grasshopper or a frog. Gollum  bounded  forward into the  
"shall I do? Well, I'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.' "
"Rafaelia Sneezem,4737118560716,19-03-1977
"
"the  Mountain's  quaking  feet, a  great smoke and steam  belched  from  the "
deep. Above him was a black starry  sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over  
"room:  a single  oblong block, about two  feet high,  upon  which was laid a  "
"Brunhilda MacGraith,4041375025749,01-03-1992
"
good groping in  the dark. We could save you  time and trouble. But you must  
"find  something,  if  you  look,  but  it  is  not  always  quite  the  something  you  were "
"Kelley Birth,4041596376262580,04-01-1975
"
"neither, when you're mad for fun. He's going where I want him, and where you  "
     But old Rory Brandybuck was not  so sure. Neither age  nor an  enormous 
"     Hoom, hm; hoom. hm. how did it go? Room tum, room tum, roomty toom "
"folk,'  he said  loudly. The  local inhabitants did not look  pleased at the "
""
Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed with had other  business. Of that I 
"as for your gift, lord, I will choose  one that will fit my need: swift  and "
when  the  dwarves  (with  poor  little  Bilbo  at  the  back  and  nearest  to  the  whips) 
"Boromir. Nay, stay your wrath! I do  not trust myself in this, and I refused "
"They must have  looked very queer  from outside, popping out  into  the  air one "
"     his bow was made of dragon-horn, "
"     Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting! "
"may be more than chance; but the purpose  is not clear to  me, and I fear to "
flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked  the question  that  was nearest to 
scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you  have cheated 
"his minstrel made,  and he made no  other song after. The slow voices of the "
####-'Strider!' he exclaimed when he  got back his breath.  'Him with a crown and 
""
     'If I had! If you had!' he said. 'Such words and ifs are  vain.  It has 
"grunted. `Well, I  suppose it's always easier getting down than up. Those as "
allay. I knew at last that something dark and deadly was at work. And I have  
"when   drop or  morsel last passed my lips. I'd forgotten it,  trying to find "
"streets of Minas  Tirith they clattered, while the noise of  war rose behind "
"Edsel Gogan,4041372285251860,03-10-1983
"
"Nicki Gryglewski,4017958065989,07-02-1995
"
hobbits  visited the Common  Room in the evening  and  answered a  good 
Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had become 
"     'Well, they are gone,' said  Aragorn at last. 'We cannot  find  them or  "
Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He then seized  Merry's feet and drew him 
"discovery  of  the  lower  gate,  and  their  horror  when  they  found  that  Mr.  Baggins "
 
"Tired he is, thirsty  he is, yes thirsty; and he guides them and he searches "
 
""
"     They  picked  their  steps away from the  skirts of the cliff,  among a  "
"enough), lest peril perchance waylay  me and I  fall lower  in the test than "
among the ashes. But there  is little hope there:  the horsemen  of Rohan did 
####-     Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might; but his 
longed 
"Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of "
"     'Yes; but the hope is faint.  If he comes  this way at  all, he may not "
"all this. It's Sharkey, I say.' "
"     'Indeed deep  in the  wood they dwell,' said Aragorn, and sighed as  if "
"fields about it. For upon  the  top stood  a  black stone, round  as a great "
     `Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. `I had not thought of that. And poor Sam!  
     It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and their hope 
by  threads  of water trickling down from some source  higher up the valley.  
"behind.  At  last, as  they began to   climb  a  steep slope, he  stopped and "
     The next stage of their journey was much the same as the  last. As they 
shields. Hundreds and hundreds more  were pouring over the Dike and  through 
"     meet was his ending. When his mound is raised, "
"     'It is good to learn that they are still alive,' said Gimli;  'for they "
The  Men of Westernesse  came  to their aid. That  is a  chapter of  ancient 
"####-are  coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far now from "
place now  to  linger in. I will  ride ahead at once with Peregrin  Took. It 
     The Gate was shut. All night watchmen on the  walls heard the rumour of 
"thoughtfully,  but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded  like "
could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter. 
bigger one and fill it full o' wheels and outlandish contraptions. Only that 
     And the people sang in all the ways of the City. 
"""Hush!"" said Gandalf. ""Let Thorin speak!"" And this is bow Thorin began. "
"Lannie Iacovelli,4792058693877211,31-05-1986
"
"     The  two  hobbits  trussed their  small packs,  put  them  on ready for  "
find their companions.  
three riders swept up and passed like flying ghosts in the moon and vanished  
sadly from its barren and broken branches back into the clear water. 
Gandalf and Aragorn  went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its 
"a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and rays of white light "
my precious time he has wasted already. 'Down snake!' he said suddenly in  a 
respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo  Baggins; there  was never much to tell  of 
"     '""We want man-food for twenty-five,"" the Ents said, so you can see that "
"quite  unable  to decide whether he felt angry,  amused, relieved, or merely "
"there 'free to  all finders,  birds, beasts. Elves  or Men,  and  all kindly "
blazed  suddenly like a white torch in his  hand. It flamed like a star that 
"me  again,  first  dismiss  the  elvish  host  to  the  woods  where  it  belongs,  and  then "
reach  his  hand  even  when  he  climbed  down  to  the  bottom  branch  and  hung  his 
"him. Which is he?"" "
"before  the Door.  On  the threshold sat an  old man, aged beyond  guess  of "
Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or 
"rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the  "
""
the injured air of a liar suspected when for once  he has told the truth. or  
it worsted!' 
"stood, and there were now two tall trees like sentinels  a t the beginning of "
"####-that its  nails were red.  Unheeding  Gandalf rode  on  into  the mist,  and "
and very great was their surprise to see the pool before them and the Gate blocked 
"head, carven  with cunning  in forms human  and bestial, but all corrupt and  "
"errand in the water. Strange chances, but murder will out, 'tis said. "
"     'Yes, whichever side  wins, his outlook is poor,'  said  Merry. 'Things "
""
"earth, and they felt the  walls of the City quiver. A sound like a sigh went "
voices out of the past: 
in  unusual numbers. The ancient East -West Road ran through the Shire to its 
tales have been told: all that now remains is but an outlier of its northern 
"mostly  sad and ominous: of  gathering  darkness, the wars  of Men,  and the "
"Masha Knutton,4041599326006,12-02-1982
"
"ways  out  of  the wood,  and was  left  to wander miserably  in  the  forest,  terrified  of "
which they had apparently got ready for the occasion. 
overhead. Searing  lightning smote down into the hills. Then came a blast of 
     The Riders gazed up at Thjoden like men startled  out of a dream. Harsh 
eagerly accepted. 
As it bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up. 
"Evelyn Trembley,4041371813973,30-06-1982
"
manner of the children of Men before the Dark Years. But I do not know  what 
"Some who have read the book, or at  any rate have reviewed it, have found it "
"When  the  tale  of  their  joumeyings  was  told,  there  were  other  tales,  and  yet "
The  roots  of those mountains  must be  roots indeed; there  must be  great 
hearing that name.  And yet  in truth  I believe that  the news that Faramir 
"Ariana Curphey,4624600572658,17-09-1998
"
"doings in  the Shire. Frodo did not  prove  very communicative,  and he soon "
"and searched, of course I have. But not for the  Black One. The Precious was "
the end  of his  nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed  to  Aragorn that he 
"Harmon Finch,4017955435798556,13-02-1975
"
"Emlyn Kleine,4363946081389543,27-06-1999
"
unexpected return. The riches  he  had brought back from his travels had now 
soon.' 
"eastward. A bridge has  been built down there, about  a mile away, where the "
"     From the  Gate  of Kings  the  North Wind rides,  and past the  roaring falls;  "
"     Strider sprang from hiding and  dashed  down  towards the Road, leaping "
"there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: "
precipice to the black trough that lay between  them  and the inner ridge. A 
"     'Not wholly, perhaps,' said Faramir; 'but malice eats it like a canker, "
"Diane-marie Yanyushkin,4041377629530,05-07-1983
"
"in  such  shares  as had been planned,  to Balin  and Dwalin,  and Dori  and Nori  and "
"the Faces are dark. Yes, come let's go! ' "
"     'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half "
"Mikey Girardeau,4041378323711,24-09-1996
"
"journey with  Tom Bombadil trotting gaily  beside them, or  before  them, on "
"Clarence Stansbie,4215771380978576,31-12-1987
"
"you speak of Master  Gandalf,  as if he was  in a story that had come  to an "
     'Fear not!  ' he said. `Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses 
     Sam  had  been  getting more  and  more  impatient  and  angry at  this 
since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land 
mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.' 
"Zarah Nairy,4557542937367,29-01-1991
"
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men. 
"Stefano Mynett,4041377929138,11-09-1982
"
"Hanna Auton,4017957809783,15-02-1981
"
is called in your  tongue.  That  is a wide region of sluggish fen where the 
"Then  the  dwarves  bowed  low  before  their  Gate,  but  words  stuck  in  their "
""
"""I  can't  give  you  those,  while  the  siege  is  going  on.  But  it  is  long  since  I "
"or a slave's  flattery, of that  vast fortress. armoury, prison,  furnace of "
"swift, for I have never had such need of haste before."" "
"Ami Mitchinson,4041597327879357,26-12-1994
"
     The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the remainder 
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him. 
Rauros  far away.  Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over the deep 
"down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears of  the Riders were tipped with "
"string of foul  names and curses. `I  gave  him  better  than  I got, but he "
"     After much wandering and search they found a way that they could climb, "
     In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings  of the 
"and were clad in green  and  brown of varied hues, as if the better  to walk  "
weapons close to hand! ' 
"side.  Tom said that it had once been  the boundary of a kingdom, but a very "
side. 
"tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing at  old  grief, you shall tell "
"while the Sun  was  in the sky.  But they closed  round at  night, and I was "
"fiercely. His hold on Sam's mouth slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged "
"even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware "
Pour the milk on the pantry floor! 
     'I haven't changed my mind.  But it's only sense: put the one lowest as 
"     Bilbo backed away  to the  wall, brea thing hard, his hand  clutching at "
"folded up and wrapped  in tissue-paper his  embroidered  silk waistcoat, and "
"Mariele Lissemore,4540784458005178,31-07-2000
"
"They  lived  mostly  in  Staddle though  there were  some  in  Bree  itself,  "
Arwen was there.' 
     To Sam in  the leading  boat  was given the  task  of watchman. He  lay 
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?' 
harm; and  I had no right to  do so anyway. I could only watch  and wait.  I 
     To hope's end I rode and to heart's breaking: 
"     `Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.' "
grace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere  behind 
"shoulder of the land  lay grey and bare,  and beyond that the dark shapes of "
day only by the slow spreading of the thin grey light. 
"Margi Azam,4017950412205,30-09-1993
"
direction  from  which  the  stones  were  coming.  As  quick  as  lightning  they  came 
"with the  burden  went  first, and  behind them  there  was a  good  deal of "
"wrapped in a great black  cloak and  hood, so that only his boots in the high "
"beat  upon it, and the red  light was broken  into many flickering  beams of "
"Gandalf  took  their  leave  at  last  of Beorn,  and  though  he  longed  for  home. Bilbo "
####-expenses  guaranteed  in  any  event;  funeral  expenses  to  be  defrayed  by  us  or 
combined  birthday-parties  at  Bag  End;  but  now  it  was understood that 
"not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of  course,  can cook, for they  begin to "
fitted  on  there  came  the  sound  of  voices  and  the  flicker  of  lights.  A  number  of 
"for a troll, but it was as good as a short sword for the hobbit. "
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in 
"still back there in the power of the goblins!"" "
work for. He told me  that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves.  
"     Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning of both "
away. He won't ever write our story now.' 
"     'So I thought,'  said  Aragorn; 'but I  cannot  read the riddle, unless "
"know clearly why, and  of what I guess I cannot  speak openly out  here. But "
"####-chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us. "
""
with Frodo  and Sam  behind.  Skirting the hither  side of the pool where the 
"Hadlee Ghione,4041377421965000,19-10-1980
"
     It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The  hobbits 
"lest the chance should fade, the dwarves rushed to the rock and pushed-in vain. "
have  left  any  message behind for Gandalf otherwise.  I don't know whether 
"     'He has never been away,' said Aragorn.  'I am Strider and D®nadan too,  "
"still  showing  the  fragments  of  old  carven  work  within,  worn  and  splintered  and "
"'There's a Black Rider over us,' he said. 'I can feel it. We had better keep "
"     But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster near by, he "
"for an empty belly. But you won't find any, so you needn't look. But be good  "
"the  dead  and  the  wounded.  Victory  seemed  at  hand,  when  a  cry  rang  out  on  the "
"'But  I  cannot  tell it properly, only in short; and then  we  must end our "
"the  caging of live things, and I will not keep even such creatures as these "
"were, most of  them took off  their  feathers and joined in  the revolt. The "
"over? And when do they have dinner, and where?' "
carven with birds and flowers whose eyes and petals were of jewels; coats of mail 
what you see there before us!' 
down  into  darkness; and all the while  far  below there was a rumour and a  
"It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after  this "
"who were  near, and he spoke now  in a clear voice  so that many also of the "
"Marylin Condliffe,4017955212750077,27-08-1979
"
"Let  the other companies behind follow these three that lead,  as  they have "
"full  of  horrible  dreams,  as  evening wore  to  black  night;  and  there we must  leave "
     Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing 
"very necessary  to  tackle  the Misty Mountains by  the proper path, or else you will "
     Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and 
true enough! 
"fled  from Hobbiton, and even there  in the woods of the Shire it had frozen "
enemy is here!' 
North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?' 
""
"gold, he hated dragons and their cruel wickedness, and he grieved to remember the "
     They climbed  and scrambled up the rock. If the  stair had been made it 
"Lothaire Arpin,4041371455015,24-03-1979
"
"     'It is the end,' said Gandalf. 'Let us go.' "
"tell were a mere  wonder and bewilderment to  their host, and far beyond his "
     For meat was hard to come by. 
"ring.  A  shadow  fell on my  heart then, though  I did not know  yet what I "
"Kitti Achromov,4041593413161792,30-11-2000
"
"     'But Jomer I cannot spare, nor  would he stay,'  said the king; 'and he "
"and  I've no time myself, but I want  a message took to the Shire. Have  you "
"     Frodo came  in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep "
"     `Yes, you  have seen a thing or two since  you last  peeped  out  of  a  "
"     'I broke off our speech together,' said Faramir, 'not only because time "
"     Then Faramir laughed merrily.  'That is well,' he said; 'for I am not  a  "
"or two ahead. 'Now then!'  said the  farmer, throwing the  reins to  Sam and "
"Case Lowder,4041374817729991,26-07-1976
"
"     At last one  evening  they came over  the  high moors, suddenly  as  to "
"well as any but the most skilled dwarves, when they take the trouble, though they "
wait!' 
"     Each time that  the second thought spoke, Gollum's  long hand crept out "
"and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay,  Gandalf "
     'The staff  in the hand of a wizard may  be more  than a prop for  age' 
"dwarf-kings  of  the Mountain,  Thror  and  Thrain  of  the  race  of  Durin,  and  of  the "
dangerous than before. Now for it!' 
"beginning of quite  a broad path leading to the Bonfire  Glade,  and then on "
it seemed to  be  casting off at last all doubt and care and  fear. And then 
not know of  the  quarrel between his  servants and the Orcs  of Mordor; nor  
"with hoops of steel, and studded about the bring with white gems, was set upon the "
"you'll find it out soon enough. And I'll see what can be done  about supper, "
"The stars are in blossom, the moon is in flower,  "
"they were caught again. So following the hobbit, down into the lowest cellars they "
     Chapter 2   The Passage of the Marshes  
"as these  escape them. But who knows what she spoke to  the darkness, alone, "
"stopped to look at them. Presently one of them caught sight of him, and with "
moment. 
"and they  were now weary beyond joy  or sorrow. These three were  unscathed, "
more of them.' 
"     Suddenly, and to his  own surprise,  Frodo  felt a hot wrath blaze up in "
     Then  they all gazed  at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced 
"one would sing amid the gloom  some staves of the Lay of Nimrodel, or  other  "
"Pip Klimkiewich,4041591764162,26-08-1992
"
"They halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply. Only a glimpse,  "
"Frodo son of Drogo. Go now to rest -- but  first tell  me only, if you will, "
stopped short. Then he heard feet coming. Someone was running in great haste 
tall peak;  at the mouth of  the  vale there  stood  like  sentinel a lonely 
"     He laid  his hand on  Gimli's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed "
"so  he needs a pony. For you  cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, "
of 
"the  Enemy  should  recover what he lost. Nay, it  should  have  been  kept, "
allegiance to Gondor and five  thousand  swords.  And some said that when the 
     'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from 
not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into 
"not wish to  see it, or  touch  it, or know more of it than I know (which is "
"down the steps, a globe of crystal, dark,  but glowing with a heart of fire. "
"""No! no!"" said Bilbo. ""I didn't mean that. I meant, is there no way round?"" "
"wavering, when Merry and Pippin,  who were on the east side, came across and "
"     'Yes I do!' replied Mugwort. 'And I mean what I say, what's more.' "
"Darkness  grew  deeper  and  he  grew  ever  more  uneasy.  ""Shut  the  door!""  he "
"     'I sent my  son forth,  unthanked, unblessed, out  into needless peril, "
"to be removed, certainly never how any part of it that might fall to his share was to "
     Frodo  was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time  he 
"Dare Steventon,4643970973966129,18-08-1983
"
"Valli Chazerand,4357296791475986,14-09-1976
"
     Horsemen  were  galloping on  the grass of  Rohan;  wolves poured  from  
"into the West. Then Shadowfax gathered himself together and sprang away, "
     And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice. 
Haradrim. 
"their stores had no need of any guard, for all  the  land was desolate and empty. So "
than he.' 
"     in the Northern fields never returning, "
     And Gandalf said: 'Many  folk  like to know beforehand what is to be set 
"destroyed  by  fire  or blast  of  sorcery,  we could  split  Isengard  into "
     'Look!' he cried. 'Gulls! They are flying far inland. A wonder they are 
"marvellous speed, and in the  nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they  "
""
all I'm hoping for all the time. All the big important  plans are not for my 
"Rudy Bessent,4041594913584,02-02-2000
"
"Sada Pendlebury,4041598873503,23-11-1986
"
staring about him. 
"Fawn Kissell,4537313624154,04-03-1985
"
and halted u nder the long shadows of the trees. They  were on  the  top of a  
"sped  from  his  deep  lair  through  its  great  door,  out  into  the  huge  passages  of  the "
 
     Praise them! 
"milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.' "
better it?' 
Holbytlan?' 
"things  were  her  food,  and her  vomit  darkness.  Far and wide her lesser  "
"body off you as soon as  look at you, and leave  you all cold in the  dark on "
####-return for him; but here let him sleep a while.' 
"the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for any sound  upon the "
"a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened and angry. `Ach! Sss "
"There were passages leading off to the side every now and then, as he knew by the "
     the fire upon her carcanet. 
"     'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippin "
"there were battalions of Men, too. Many  of them carried torches, and in the "
"where might you be going  to?  Were you coming to visit' me? For, if so, you "
"sudden spring, and we  may yet have snow again. Far away down in the Bay  of "
"Cacilia Burdge,4041594128183,16-05-1981
"
high garden above the  steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting 
si lver ewer. 
     Merry  got up  and yawned. His few hours'  sleep  had not  been  nearly 
 
Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.' 
"together under  the stars, recalling  the ages that were gone and  all their "
"The bodyguard of Bolg came howling against them, and drove in upon their ranks "
"     'Hullo!' said  Merry. 'So that's what is bothering you? Now, Pippin  my "
in a  fork or deep cleft  at the end of the  mountains. It  is probably down 
"""It is mighty cold!"" said Bombur. ""I wish we could have a fire up here as they "
the leaves were red  and yellow  in the  autumn  sun. At length they came to  
"till the wretched man was squirming on the floor. Then at last he said: ""Ha, "
"shapes and changes  of hue;  and he has much  lore of herbs  and beasts, and "
"plates. Neither Frodo  nor  Sam  refused  anything that was  offered,  nor a  "
"Bernetta Craigheid,4425032486516638,12-08-1978
"
"black-harnessed soldiery, a nd a  single  banner, black but  bearing on it in "
"streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great "
in 
"     I make the earth shake, "
"wrath, and the flood would get out of hand  and  wash you all away. There is "
"     'But Faramir!' cried Pippin.  'He is  not dead, and they will  burn him "
"Marshes, and it was dark. "
     2.  
"Mirkwood, as one would expect.' "
command  in  every  language that had  ever  been  spoken  in  the  West  of 
into  the mountains  on the  northern side of that vale  where  the old city 
"permit  them to unbind their eyes, and they could  not climb. In the morning "
stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.' 
"Twenty others arms came rippling out. The dark water boiled, and there was a  "
"Gladys Shoebridge,4945187290426,09-06-1987
"
"####-rendered. But he  has chosen to withhold it, and  keep the power of Orthanc. "
"     Bilbo  Baggins called it  a  party,  but it  was really  a  variety  of "
"trembled as  with  a chill. A great  rain came out of the Sea, and it seemed "
"Andee Radenhurst,4041595196927133,08-03-1979
"
'they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business of Wizards: Wizards 
"the  Moon  waned  again,  it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it "
"the Shire, and snatches of Mr.  Bilbo's  rhymes that came into his mind like "
"     And Celeborn said: 'I do not know, Eldest.' But Galadriel sa id: 'Not in "
sun of a  cool summer's morning was  shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the 
"Millisent Laguerre,4041370407801,18-06-1993
"
key-hole; yet they did not doubt that they had found the door at last. 
"fairest  of  all  was  the  great  white  gem,  which  the  dwarves  had  found  beneath  the "
"must set his  master's will to work for another effort. At  length, stooping "
"door, unseen as he and Gandalf entered. "
"     'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,' said Legolas.  "
goblins and the elves and the first men in the North. In those days of our tale there 
"Flory Spark,4041598319333,26-09-1980
"
"Bronnie Haller,4775854235434847,11-11-1982
"
"clear out, or I'l l break your filthy little necks!' Then he  stopped, for he "
swift horsemen riding in  a  line  that  wound about it from the tip  to the 
"and  gold,  to  which  habit  he  owed  his  position.  Others  were  of  different  mind, "
they were drawing near to Orthanc. 
"snake,  unable to move.  And  as  he  waited, he felt, more urgent than ever  "
of 
"yourselves! I  have passed through fire and  deep water,  since we parted. I "
shouldered their packs again and were off. 
"precipice, until it turned southward and went winding down into the darkness "
"for such was their  fortune and the skill  and might of their  arms, and few "
"was just as well, for he was not feeling particularly cheerful. He had not forgotten "
trackless  dark  of  Mirkwood.  Songs  have  said  that  three  parts  of  the  goblin 
shadowy and dim. 
"glance upon Pippin. 'What say you to that, Halfling?' "
folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand. 
"large  and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used  to the light. "
"Sam calling. Don't go  where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  O wake up, "
evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and 
"He recognized the voice of the Marshal, Elfhelm. "
"     'Good  evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be "
"In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet hole, filled with "
"At  length  he  spoke  again:  ""This  is  no  time  for  angry  words.  Master,  or  for "
"Antonetta Flewan,4017952624103771,16-11-1983
"
"as escort to the  'prisoners'; but Merry made  them  march  in front,  while "
"did  not  dare  to  wade  out  into  the  darkness.  He  could  not  swim;  and  he  thought, "
outmatching the wings of the Nazgyl.' 
"     Now far ahead the Road has gone, "
"fan-progress,  but as  they  went on, their passage  became slower  and more "
There  was  nothing  now  to  be  done  but  to  tighten  the  belts  round  their  empty 
"great window immeasurably high there stabbed northward  a  flame of red, the "
"####-     'Then the Greenway will  be opened again , and his  messengers will come "
     Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path.  As if fresh 
"these beasts but that they were all destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.  "
"later! We should  begin here,  near  to  our own  camping-ground,  searching  "
anxious to continue the journey at once. So after a brief  rest they set out 
"many eyes  in my service, and  I  believe that  you know where this precious "
     'At 'em lads!' he cried. 'Let 'em have it!' 
     Out  from  the  water  a  long sinuous  tentacle had  crawled;  it  was 
"looked over the edge of quite a little cliff; and he had never liked ladders, let alone "
twisted tales and crooked promptings.' 
"up towards  the  pass,  shaking  his head, as  if engaged in  some   interior  "
"Balin's folk,' he said. `I guess  that it began with their coming to Dimrill "
outer door. 
"the Misty Mountains,  right  to  the  edge  of  the Land Beyond! Where  and O where "
"     'Running  wild  over the grass,' they  answered.  'He  will let  no man "
     There  was a guard of  orcs crouching in the  shadows behind the  great 
"we end our merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though "
"     'I can go on a good way though, and I will.' "
"You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the story, and it  is "
"     'Well told, my friend,' he said, `but that  is enough at this time. For  "
un-Shirelike. 
"concourse of  people, for the tidings had gone out into all parts of Gondor, "
"into a Roll, and learned by heart by Shire-historians. The very considerable "
"it was,  as  a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of  the Isen, where they "
"sky, leaves  on trees, men in  the dark. You have a score of scores  counted "
"hiding-place.  Biting  back  a cry, he leapt  down from the spring and  ran, "
was coming on before they came back to the road at the end of the long level 
"side  of  the ring, now dying away there and rising to a great boom  on  the "
young rascals of Buckland. But it  wasn't mushrooms I was thinking of. I had 
'It's a long time since I saw you round here. It's lucky for you that I know 
"knew  their  way,  as  well  as  you  do  to  the  nearest  post-office;  and  the  way  went "
"     'How far  is  Rivendell?' asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The  world "
"boom,  and "
"can feel their  presence - it troubled our hearts, as  soon as we came here, "
     The great shadow  descended like a falling cloud. And behold!  it was a  
"This was  Thorin's  style. He was  an  important  dwarf.  If  he  had  been  allowed, "
nastiest  things  they  saw  were  the  cobwebs:  dark  dense  cobwebs  with  threads 
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything  actually written by the  old 
indeed there was any to  find; but Sam felt that  they ought at least to get 
trouble as of great engines throbbing and labouring. 
grass. Bagshot  Row was a yawning sand and gravel quarry. Bag End up. 
old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond was against their coming.' 
"pressing. Suddenly he leaped  forward, and  ran to the  summit,  across  the "
through  never  having  anyone  else  to  speak  to). This  is what  he  had  come  to  find 
"live to thank me yet. Now Bilbo, my boy, fetch the lamp, and let's have little light "
soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears!' He drew himself up and looked 
"which  was  still  full.  By  that  time  they  felt  like  breakfast,  and  being  very  hungry "
"Virgil Capelle,4115190375833335,23-01-1980
"
"     In  the  middle of the table, against  the  woven cloths upon the wall, "
"at any  rate,  land  that  is not without hope.  Indeed  for your old grand-father Took's "
"     'That's interesting,' said Gandalf.  'Well,  what did  you  think of it "
the darkening path. Slowly  they laboured on. As they rose  above the stench  
"kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over  it.  And  then the "
I hope we get a chance of telling him about it! ' 
"mountain-side. If the map was true, somewhere high above the cliff at the valley's "
should  I  have  got  all  that  treasure  home  without  war  and  murder  all  along  the 
 
"and  he turned, looking back north where the skies were pale and clear. Then "
"     'What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me at eve? "
"strung-up in an orc-camp,' said Pippin. 'Let me see, what is today?' "
was 
one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse. He was blowing a  
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more:  many's the  talk I had with  him  when I was a  
"Lorin Vigrass,4017956355616208,23-06-1992
"
"Artemas Minifie,4041374944887886,14-12-1986
"
"into the Hill, and they  were lined with brick. The Gaffer  was  restored to "
"Frodo well enough, a black  cap with iron rim, and  iron  hoops covered with "
"     'Well do you see and speak,' said the wizard. 'For I am Gandalf. I have "
"as  for valour,  that  cannot be computed by stature. He has  passed through "
"Georgena Smithe,4211681760335,03-10-2000
"
 
"""Let's  have  a  light!""  he  said.  ""I  am  here,  if  you want me!""  and  he  slipped  off "
"quiet, without a lot  of relatives prying around, and a string of confounded "
"     A brief vision he had of  swirling cloud, and in the midst of it towers "
"Ulrika Elsom,4017955475306,29-10-1986
"
"Damita Labrom,4017955025937846,28-01-1994
"
"just  on  the  stroke  of  eleven,  and  found  he  had  come  without  a  pocket-"
"I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of "
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live  still some of his  chief 
"     What a pity Bilbo did not stub the vile creature, when he had a chance! "
     'The  Captains  of the  Outlands  are  expected up the South  Road  ere 
"destroy the armed might  of the  Dark Lord,  then it is folly  to go without "
"Moses Horrigan,4041378519364262,09-07-1998
"
""
"     He stooped and looked in Mirrormere, "
receive them as the  tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and 
"     `You speak  of  what  you do not  know,  when you  liken  Moria to  the "
"""What has it got in its pocketses?"" The sound came hissing louder and sharper, "
"dodging  round  the  pillars  of  the  hall,  changing  them  into  all  sorts  of  different "
the hunt was up. The red eye of the tower had not been blind. He was caught. 
almost certainly be fatal. 
the eye; he was greened and grimed from the old bark of the greater boughs; more 
"straight-sided   windows,  bare   and   dimly  lit,  all  very   gloomy  and "
his own land. 
here for ever as a warning.' 
"Quillan Kelby,4041591469903,13-08-1986
"
"that is now so long ago that the hills  have forgotten them, though a shadow  "
     'Does he now?' said Butterbur looking puzzled. 'Though I'm sure I don't 
     Clear is the water of your well; 
"expected. Why should I welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.' "
"They had forgotten Thorin! Part of  the wall, moved by  levers, fell outward with a "
"dark box-woods. Looking west they could see,  below them in a haze of light, "
"Louella Woollam,4041371325663,14-09-1999
"
####- 
"Ellen Spurriar,4041370938528403,20-08-1983
"
"     'That  you  need not  pursue  them further,' said Jomer. 'The  Orcs are "
three times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and  Galadriel.  'It 
     'What's the  matter  with the place?'  said Merry. 'Has it  been a  bad 
"they come, we  deem. They hold  the northward road; and  many have passed "
"running water  was  on their right hand, and it grew  nearer and louder.  At "
and  such  stores  as  they  had  brought  with  them  from  the  river.  The  others  went 
"'I'm sorry, but you startled me out of my sleep. And I  shouldn't  have been "
lead five hundreds of his  best Riders on horse; and another company of five 
"     From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the sandhills and the stones; "
what a piece of bacon feels like when it is suddenly picked out of the pan on a fork 
"     'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you,' he  said. 'now for "
"Rosette Clements,4041596496901,16-01-1991
"
he  has  many  more useful  servants   -  but  he won't forget you again. And 
"Cosmo Gatehouse,4041373421526629,08-08-1988
"
War of the  Ring and included  many glimpses of the yet more ancient history 
"by side, Celeborn and Galadriel.  They stood up to greet  their guests, after  "
"Corenda Grimstead,4308343577675627,29-05-1981
"
"his forehead, and  a silver harp was in his  hand, and upon his finger was a  "
"he knelt,  offering his  notched sword to the king. 'Command  me, lord!'  he "
with a pale flame. 
""
"remembered  only  too  well  the  warnings  of  the  wizard  and  of  Beorn.  ""A  feast "
"Murray Menichi,4041371897372,07-12-2000
"
"leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weather top. Crush  one in the  water, "
"food and drink, but not  to be allowed  to pass  the doors of  their  little prisons, until "
"surviving female  relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine,  and had "
the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.' 
"     With astonishing speed and  skill they  checked  their steeds, wheeled, "
flashed and  went  out. And when Denethor descended again he went to 
decided to go down and  explore the City. He took a few morsels that he  had 
"the work that had been done, but no living thing could they see far or near. "
"westward, Tom was here already, before the  seas were bent. He knew the dark "
"Peder Godsal,4017956745103,01-04-1976
"
cold clear dawn  at the  end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellers 
worse trouble than all the damage the Men have done.' 
"pipe, think  of  me! For  never now shall I  sit with you in Meduseld,  as I "
"     Sam was looking  at Orodruin,  the Mountain of  Fire. Ever and anon the  "
"     Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! "
"they  go  back,  sometimes,  or  where  a  passage  behind  may  lead  to,  or  what  is "
went  round out of  view it reached the foot  of the  cone upon its  eastern 
gently. 
"if Lugb®rz wanted him, you'd  have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there "
"Rosalynd Privost,4041370573768,24-11-1998
"
"     And then wonder took him, and a great joy; and he cast  his sword up in "
     `Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose!'  he  cried. 'I'm coming. Just you show 
of 
 
"hope, as  long as  despair could  be  postponed. Now they  were come to  the "
"the strength of Gondor  failed, and men slept, and for long years the towers "
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope  that no evil has 
"shall I be pleased!"" "
"Tirith, the army  began its  northward  march along  the  road.  It was some "
"were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned "
"necessity.'  He sighed. 'Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet  again.  "
company upon the road as went with Thjoden Thengel's  son to the land of his 
"and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.' "
"Conchita Bamford,4017950392546122,16-02-1984
"
     'We shall fall in battle valiantly.  Yet there is still hope  that they 
"from father to son in the House  of  Eorl, then  the  Door  under Dwimorberg "
The wind went on from West to East ;  
"""Bless  us  and  splash  us, my  precioussss!  I  guess  it's  a  choice  feast;  at  least  a "
"the sound  of  hurried labour  could  be heard:  beat  of hammers,  clink of "
"     'That road  I will take, nonetheless,' said Aragorn. 'But I say to you, "
drowsy  and  paid  little  heed  to  them.  They  spoke  most  of  gold  and  silver  and 
"     'All the ""great secrets"" under the mountains had turned  out to be just  "
"     'We still have our journey and our errand before us,' answered Gandalf.  "
"     'Ponies would  not help  us to  escape  horsemen,'  he  said  at  last, "
to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.' 
 
"Riders. If the horsemen had already  found  the dell, the sooner Strider led "
crept stealthily towards the cliff.  
"Dora Jannequin,4041373071588,01-01-1987
"
trunk  on the far side of the tree from  the prisoners. As soon  as Sam  had 
"""Nothing that you or your friends have to offer."" "
"future. I am not  altogether on anybody's side, because nobody is altogether  "
"the end of  June, soon  after Frodo's  plan  had  been finally  arranged, he "
"that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien, "
on him. 
"master means to do ,' he thought. `If he knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put "
"and Gandalf  still looked each other in the eye, as if  reading the  other's "
"####-wise  and  famous  pair,  old  Care  and  his  wife,  that  lived  here  above  the  guard-"
"on the north side of the citadel, where  they had sat. 'It is a black night, "
"     'Away  now,  Shadowfax!  Run,  greatheart,  run as  you have never  run "
high white peaks glimmering among the clouds. 
was thrust on me.' 
single jewel the light of which went up like a flame. 
     At first he could see nothing. In his great need he drew  out once more 
"     'Do not misunderstand him, lord,'  said Jowyn. 'It is not lack  of care "
"grief.  Laurelindurenan lindelorendor malinornjlion ornemalin ,' he hummed to "
"     And Gandalf coming  looked at it, and said: 'Verily this is a sapling of "
"taking off the spider sitting in the middle of it, whack, dead. After that there was a "
"only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the "
"they are quite as safe and, well funny as  they seem. They seem slow, queer, "
"     It  was  dark,  and  white  stars  were  shining,  when  Frodo and  his "
in sleep. 
the  words: a few lines came clear  to his  ears  through the rushing of the 
"started off again. They now kept  a stone's throw to  the left of  the road, "
"taken away), and trying to look as if this was all perfectly  ordinary and. not in the "
"marvellous  than  in high summer. At  last  they came up  the  long road, and reached "
"trench, great engines for the casting of missiles. There were  none upon the "
     `What did you  do  to  him?' cried  Frodo in alarm. 'He was really very 
"Temple Olennikov,4959090478953684,16-07-1998
"
"     'Perhaps you're right, Sam,'  said Frodo  speaking openly. 'There is  a "
"####-""After  all  he  is  my  friend,""  said  the  wizard,  ""and  not  a  bad  little  chap.  I  feel "
"and  sing  with  us,  or  will  you  go  straight  on?  Supper  is  preparing  over  there,"" he "
"     'Alas!' said  Aragorn. 'Thus  passes the  heir of Denethor, Lord of the "
"carven  stair,  he showed  them to a fair room, light  and airy, with goodly  "
"what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives' tales, such as we  "
"mocked.  'Oh, is he  indeed? Swagger it, swagger it, my little cock -a -whoop.  "
Minas Tirith  will be eager to see any that bear the  latest tidings of  his 
"####-hand  and  across  the  fires,  and  some  were  harping  and many  were  singing.  Their "
"ever. He saw no colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and green, "
     fate before him. Fealty kept he; 
"the place of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief.' "
"Silvio Poulsom,4017956627994185,15-09-1984
"
"""Bilbo  Baggins,  a  bur—  a  hobbit,""  said  poor  Bilbo,  shaking  all  over,  and "
"     Now low beyond the swell, "
"horrible as carrion-fowl  yet greater than  eagles, cruel as death. Now they "
to rend both heart and stone. 
"Anton Pevie,4017953319260355,29-10-1993
"
libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained much that did  not  appear 
     Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to creep down 
a green gleam in Gollum's eye. Gollum muttered but did not reply. 
"Margareta Perren,4017957652704,24-06-1994
"
the dogs would be  told  to see him   off. But Farmer Maggot took him by  the 
"quarrelling  about  Frodo,  and the  spoil.  For  a second  Sam  halted, for "
of  the  northern  mountains  were  the  greatest  of  all  birds;  they  were  proud  and 
rendered  a  service  to  the  eagles  and  healed  their  lord  from  an  arrow-wound. So 
the ground with fingers or toes. or merely listening with one ear pressed to 
race of those  that are named the Black  N®menureans;  for   they established 
happened away up there a t the  door? ' he asked. `Did you meet the beater of 
puffed as they bathed their faces and hands.  
"     'No,' said Gandalf, 'but I can. The  letters are Elvish,  of an ancient "
could  see for themselves the black sails. For Jomer was now scarcely a mile  
 
"before it. 'Master, master!' cried Sam, and the  life and  urgency came back  "
learn how they came by the wine.' 
"with his  protruding eyes. The fleeting  moment  had  passed, beyond recall.  "
looking  out eastward. They saw  that they had  only come some three or four 
long way on  foot. Luckily  they had  saved  enough of  their  stores  to  last  them  still 
"three  furlongs  away,  but  they  could go no  further.  The  horsemen  had "
and show me so much kindness.' 
"     Brazen trumpets sounded.  The enemy surged  forward,  some against  the "
«I should think so  - in these parts! We are plain quiet folk and have no use for 
"breath  and  for  a  polite  remark  from  the  hob-bit,  but  the  compliments were  quite "
"Tobey Vian,4041591577583942,16-06-1981
"
go.' 
"setting sun with the last light of Durin's Day will shine upon the key-hole."" "
"Candide Huniwall,4017954028080,22-05-2001
"
"stocky, that is, even when they  are not actually much shorter. Their height "
"turned aside from the  Road,  and they  now  entered a wide flat expanse  of "
precipice that stood behind the  City. And standing there they  surveyed the 
between the arms of  the dale. Some  way  below the mere they came on a deep 
"and  strong, he did not know.  Yet he felt in his heart that Faramir, though "
"terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to  find nests; it "
"than I used to in the old days"" – he meant last spring before he left his own house, "
"hobbit, a perian  mind you, come from the battle-field. I don't think he can "
Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the  pages seem to have numbers referring  to 
"thought. It will find its  way in,  and then I shall drown.' He felt that he "
"Somehow, somehow!  ' "
"     'So,' said  Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. 'You were there?  "
"will follow the Orcs,' he said at last. 'I would have guided Frodo to Mordor  "
"said Sam. 'If only the  Lady could see us or hear us, I'd say to  her: (Your "
Brandir.' 
""
that door again. 
     'What shall  we  wear?' said Sam; for all he could  see was the old and 
"vaguely: neither he nor  any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the "
defending a  strong place  and   walking openly  into the arms  of death.  At  
"said Denethor.  'Many, many years lie on it.  Surely this is a blade wrought "
the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon  the breast of Thorin under the Lonely 
too  many Men there in these days. But I am forgetting  my manners! Will you  
"A final note may be added, on a point raised by several students of  the  lore of "
last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.' 
"stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as  if  dead,  face downwards  on the "
     'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?' 
"Red  with his own living blood  his  hand  shone for  a moment, and then  he "
""
"Sam stared up at the inn  with its three  storeys and many windows, and felt "
"Patricia Torald,4041376988762,12-01-1979
"
     The hobbits were glad  to leave  the  cheerless lands and the  perilous 
Ford.  As soon as the  captain  of the Ringwraiths rode into  the  water the 
"ending  once  more. And  he  went on, and there  was  yellow light, and fire "
forward to explore. 
"Winna Rieger,4041591622888692,28-05-1999
"
"Josephine Clears,4041597911733564,18-08-1976
"
"Ianthe Jehu,4041370146513155,13-02-1988
"
absence. For three years  after  the Party he had  been away.  Then he  paid 
"Gleams of sun were  striking through the hurrying clouds, and the forest now "
"an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long song in Entish! But "
"####-     A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake "
"Elianore Hinken,4017954435011813,26-04-1984
"
has  mastered it and now is quiet. Proud and grave he stood for  a moment as 
quick at picking up  words.  It  was now Frodo's turn to feel  pleased  with 
"shone coldly as  they peered inside, and then they  lifted  and gazed up  at "
"Nananne Camelli,4017956416226,22-11-1975
"
"Jamison Lawranson,4041595001779943,01-10-1990
"
"their dwellings in Middle-earth during the years of Sauron's domination, and "
"the terraces above  the  loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun "
place in the north where the western  range and the  northern range send out 
"course, was  Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally "
ever heard before. 
"went,  one  after  another, with many  a  clash  and  a  bump,  thudding  on  top  of  ones "
Woodhall. 
"Gandalf. `The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are  places "
"Pryce Bunnell,4017954345777735,11-07-1994
"
and fears at least I never expected that.' 
"Mountain from the hills behind. How much Gandalf knew cannot be said, but it is "
"Tower and the Steward, he  hurried to the entrance of the citadel.  There he "
"their voyage was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the sun was setting, "
"There  was no  escape  that way. That was to do nothing, not even to grieve.  "
"camping-place  was  damp, cold,  and uncomfortable;  and the  biting insects "
"stiffened  at  once,  and  sniffed,  and  his  eyes  went  green.  He  hissed  softly  but "
his mind. 
"     I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies, "
     When evening in the Shire was grey 
"sleeve  over his nose, and got up, a nd stamped about, trying to whistle, and "
""
before him. Then he put it on. 
"arms up round him, like a spider whose descending thread is snapped. "
time.  But  it  was  not  Gandalf.  Instead  there  was  a  very  old-looking  dwarf  on  the 
for camp and the feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught his 
"     Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no "
"bit, though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc, as much as we "
"doorstep, of course, really, but they used to call the little grassy space between the "
"disposed to be quick  friends with anyone who had beaten his master, however  "
one another's orc-speech. There  was  an angry  debate concerning  what they 
Thorin; and then they went down to the water to see the elves dance and sing upon 
"know what passes there. For few,  I deem, know of  our deeds, and  therefore "
""
"westward cliffs. Had they known,  they could have reached it quicker, for it "
land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?' 
"""So  comes  snow  after  fire,  and  even  dragons  have  their  ending!""  said  Bilbo, "
     'The brooch of an elven-cloak!' cried Legolas and Gimli together. 
"please  me,  I think; for, of  course,  they aren't really  good  enough for  "
"Isengard,  for Saruman was mustering a  great force  on his  own account, in "
"imagine what spring  would look  like here, if  i t ever comes; still  less a  "
"drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper,  or a breakfast, by "
""
trickle of water flowed among the  brown and red-stained  stones of its bed;  
Up the heavens cold and steep; 
"banners of the  kings rode  north. For the hobbits each day,  each mile. was "
in thought. 'Has he gone?' he asked. 
     This was too much for  Pippin. His thoughts  went back to  the Field of 
"watched them, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned "
"followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them. "
"     to bear his shining lamp afar, "
and with a last hundred feet  of clawing scramble they were up. They came to 
"quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.' "
""
"####-still lurked. But as with Narchost and Carchost, the Towers of the Teeth, so "
"of  the  dragon's  marauding  feet,  and  there  was  some  grass  for  their  ponies.  From "
"     'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. `I have not spoken "
in the mountains were seldom unoccupied. 
"Dorita Gonzalvo,4041598048357228,27-03-1977
"
"Lebbie MacRierie,4041595175423,05-06-1991
"
"     `Not through lack of  watchfulness,' said Legolas; `but perhaps through "
     He  turned left  and  sped  across the smooth  floor of the  hall.  The 
about to look after them. 
"and struggled; but  he  remained bent,  clasping the ball  with  both hands.  "
and bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still. 
"     It was  perilous for the hobbits to use  such  a path,  but they needed "
maker. 
"poetical  exaggeration  applied  to  any  hobbit,  even  to Old Took's  great-granduncle "
growing torrent and found a road that went down into the land. 
"     It was rather  a comic  cavalcade that left the village, though the few "
There many a gloaming golden hoard  
but  the  beauty  of mithril  did not tarnish  or grow dim.  The Elves dearly 
"the  forest-gate  early  on  the  fourth  day,  that  they  rode  still  forward  after  dusk  and "
"     `Some said  that it could be seen, like a great  black horseman, a dark "
"rewarded by the gift of the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of "
"more  skill even  than Saruman,  who has  studied here  long, you  will find "
overcome with  weariness'  -- here he gave the other a dig with  his  foot -- 
"dark with thunder, and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden "
done. Safest not to. Grr! Those Nazgyl give me the creeps. And they skin the 
meaning of it?' 
""
"     `It is for the Dimrill Dale  that we are  making,' said Gandalf. `If we "
"Nina Boxill,4888774975548,22-03-1994
"
"""Come  and  see!""  said  Beorn,  and  they  followed  round  the  house.  A  goblin's "
him. A horse snorted and reared. A man called out. 
rest are scattered. 
all that was in his mind. But something  held him back. His heart  was heavy  
also  robbed  him  of  life  or  home.  The  treasure  was  not  his  that  his  evil  deeds 
spoke again. 
turn. 
bumping up and down on Bombur's back. 
"could not  tell. He was still in  the  same place,  and still his master lay "
west. 
or sitting far of in the moon watching our camps. Not only to guard you and guide 
"into  the dust. Here it came out of  the rock in a little falling streamlet, "
"     'He will have guessed,  surely?'  said  Merry. 'Were they likely to end "
"     'But  this  one was as big  as an elm tree, and walking - walking seven "
"     'Maybe you're right,' said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's eye and staring "
in full harness riding grey horses; and behind them seven hundreds of men at 
"countless  cords snapped and twisted, curling and whipping through  the air.  "
before me.' 
"""Well,  well!  It  cannot  be  helped,  and  it  is  difficult  not  to  slip  in  talking  to  a "
to  meet  him. Yet we  had  told  the old  Ent all  about  Moria. But then I 
"Katleen Balog,4451788418300,16-08-1980
"
"Gerrard Stubbeley,4041590458410,12-01-1990
"
"Wormtongue, "
"turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?' "
"Carmine Styant,4017955810437630,26-09-1978
"
"Kelley Derington,4972652287174761,05-10-2001
"
"Enemy have not found  it yet, and if they did, we  could  hold  it long even "
your speech.' 
"Pippin  ventured to  say  after  some time, when  for a  moment  the singing "
"nerveless hands while into their minds a blackness came, and they thought no "
peaks.  The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered 
     'Then  you  think that the  Darkness is coming?' said Jowyn.  'Darkness 
has  it got  in its pocketses? he  cried. The light in his eyes  was like  a  
you do not see them. Good night! ' 
"below the  deepest delving  of the Dwarves, the world is gnawed  by nameless "
"back. For he'll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name's Baggins.' "
Baggins at any  rate. But  it is evidently high  time that the  family dealt 
"in the waggon and cover up with  blankets, and we'll send this  rider to the "
     'How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road?' 
"Evangelia Hallewell,4041375975887760,21-10-1998
"
"     `I feel  like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. `Thou gh  at the moment  I  "
Barad-dyr.  The  narrow upper way on which  Sam stood leapt  swiftly down 
"there was need they both wore long grey cloaks,  finely woven and clasped at "
"should not then  shake with  dread  under this gloom, fearing the worst, and "
"Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.' "
And after that he had to get ready for a fresh start. 
"tales,  he  remained  very  happy  to  the  end  of  his  days,  and  those  were "
"around  them  now,  getting  nearer  and  nearer.  ""Dori!""  he  called,  for  Dori  was "
     `We have failed to  recapture Gollum.  We came on his trail among those 
and dark. 
"broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way. "
fires  leaped  up  and  black  rock-shadows  danced.  Then  darkness  fell  as  he  passed 
might  lead  to  a  house  or  a  farm;  and  do  what  they  could  they  made  a  deal  of 
"####-up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood face to face with  "
Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of 
"above  the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of fire. Then by some "
"bought, if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of their lords. Jomer  "
"Hieronymus Di Francecshi,4890024029072324,18-02-1996
"
"Othilie Toquet,4041590494969002,15-12-1992
"
a door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward: one of the 
"will they, nice little hobbitses?  We didn't mean no harm, but they jumps on "
come in my old  age instead of that peace  which  I  have earned.  Alas  for  
""
Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us both alike. Much we could still 
hobbits  came out  of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to 
me.  And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil mood. He was 
"Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the bitter inland sea of N®rnen amidmost, they "
made  for his noise  far quicker  than he had expected. They were  frightfully angry. 
"you  yet,  Gimli  Gluin's son,' he said. 'Far  away  is  your home and small "
"Caitlin Ferens,4645408919700,05-04-1987
"
Gollum slithered  aside. and the stroke aimed at his head  fell  across  his 
"     'I  do not  know,'  she answered.  'He  came at  night,  and rode  away "
outwards in  an endless stream. Before them went a great cavalry of horsemen 
story  you  know nothing  about.  We met  Treebeard that morning  after  the  
for me.' 
"except for patches of woodland away to the  south, beyond which  they caught "
enough for the highest and slenderest branches to bear him. Poor Mr. Baggins had 
"sup,  but somehow  I think  we had better move on from here.  Your  talk  of "
"Great Goblin!"" he chuckled fiercely to himself. "
Thjoden no stranger should pass these gates. ' 
"replenished his water -bottle. After that Frodo felt easier, and they went on "
the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves.  
"off the rock. Though, if you put your weight on  some of the ledges and give "
hall  that  went  down  to  the  lake.  People  sang  on  the  quays  and  out  of  windows. 
Aragorn. 'And unless there is much amiss  in Rohan and  the power of Saruman 
so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed the fords of Anduin; and yet  it 
"walking in the blue fields of the South, and a little wreath of snow on this "
"""I  will  carry  you  down  to  the  camp  in  the  valley,""  said  the man,  and  picked "
assault began.' 
     'So  fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me  more.  I do not even ask  
"speaking one to another. Their voices were a sort of thin creaking and hissing, but "
"     When Faramir had  taken white bread and drunk a draught of wine, he sat "
"trailed on the ground and lurked in hollows, and fumes  leaked from fissures "
Gandalf  grabbed  it  and  fitted  it  into  the  key-hole. Then  the  stone door  swung 
the  western  hills that enclosed  the valley. 'This is a  night  as long as 
"     Merry bowed,  and  the lady showed  him  the shield, which was like the "
"my heart  of hearts.  Well-preserved indeed!' he snorted.  'Why, I feel  all "
"mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! when he washed the mud away, "
need.' 
"great quivers of long green-feathered arrows. All had swords at their sides,  "
drained his mug and  went out noisily. 
"####-back from the street, and between them a narrow greensward, behind which "
Chapter 3. The Black Gate is Closed 
there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?' 
"reasons. You asked me to find the fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose "
of my son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt not defy  my will: to 
Strider took Merry  with him and went to survey the country from  the height 
catching the first rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower  
"     'Dark have  been  my  dreams  of late,' he said,  'but  I  feel as  one "
"Dusty Kennett,4258429822857258,08-08-1991
"
"Sadella Silverthorn,4041375423621,29-12-2000
"
"their long names, but they did not quiver, they did not hear or answer: they "
amazed 
"Zenia Paxton,4041594143943,24-01-1990
"
fire as  the  last shafts of light kindled the steep  faces  of the peaks of 
almost too hopeless  to care. They climbed  on to the  causeway and  trudged 
yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in 
"Turn round!' A large knob-knuckled hand was laid on each of their shoulders,  "
together -- by your leave.' 
""
"bent, almost  as if  he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing "
"     and sages old him marvels told, "
"he does not  grow  or obtain more life, he merely continues, until  at  last "
"     'Where will wants not, a way opens, so we say,' he whispered; 'and so I "
is enough.' 
"they  all climbed  up into  the  crotch of  a  large  holm-oak, whose  thick  "
Merry  and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the 
"the others have escaped, they've probably all gone with Frodo.' "
my servant left the Company.  And now your  tale fills me with dread. For if 
"     'We have journeyed a long way round,' said Legolas.  'We could have all "
""
are always troubled  about the future.  I  do not like  worrying  about  the 
"at  his master,  trying to  get at the chain and the Ring. This was probably "
"Quincey Tilburn,4041379301120,26-02-2001
"
"     `No,  not everything, Mr. Frodo. And it  hasn't failed, not yet. I took  "
after a lot of argument they had all agreed to it. 
smoothed away and did not return. 
Gimli. 
"     'Walking for pleasure! Why didn't  I drive?'  he thought, as he usually "
"flames with  the pillars of  the house standing  tall behind  them, arid dark at  the  top "
"     'But that's not  all,' he snarled, turning to Pippin. 'I shan't forget. "
"clink of  rings on  cold fingers, and gold chains in the wind.'  Stone rings "
"the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up` "
"     'I won't,'  said Frodo. 'Never.  But  I may forgive  you. Now I am  not "
"""To  the  Mountain!""  called  Bard.  ""To  the  Mountain!  Let  us  take  our  places "
"sundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it is a long time "
"Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were "
"fall have returned in greater  numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil place,  "
"yes, lots  of beautiful gold. And  some have  red paint on their cheeks, and "
place? Have you been here before? ' 
"     The clearing up certainly needed a lot of work, but  it took  less time "
very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then'  -- his voice sank even 
"####-departed, his sons long remained, together with some of the High-elven folk. "
The dark came into the room from the little window that opened in the side of 
"that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were shut again. Their "
"come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots of tall Methedras.  "
"####-     Denethor laughed bitterly. 'Nay, not  yet, Master Peregrin! He will not "
"Earl Matteacci,4041591177654,14-01-1986
"
"was tattered and unkempt, and the windows were all boarded up. "
now 
"men of Gondor  called the out  wall that they had  built with great  labour, "
he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went  first to meet him 
""
whatever  wickedness  they  were  doing.  The  goblins  hated  the  eagles  and  feared 
"Seymour Dumke,4041371031410,17-07-1999
"
     in Nimbrethil to journey in; 
"'Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive him. Strange "
"a torment, and soon a nightmare. He set his teeth and tried to stop his mind "
not wait.' 
"fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably  that  he had  brought "
"perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and  don't  "
"Milicent Jurgenson,4017953195294,19-04-1980
"
and  it was best to go  sooner  and  in daylight.  In a few moments they had 
that way he could not have said. 
"a stew for you, and some broth, Mr. Frodo.  Do you good. You'll have  to sup "
     'Ai! Steady now!' shouted Ugl®k from the rear. 
"mine  for your own profit  as  you desired  --  even so, what will you say of "
"heads giddy. They could not find Bilbo with the ring on, slipping in and out of the "
"mail-shirt  that he  found,  and paddling all round the place before I could "
"Then,  as he had  said,  the dwarves' good  feeling  towards  the  little hobbit grew "
"greedy  and tore at the trees, and threw  the fruit down and did not eat it. "
hisself and given satisfaction?' 
     The hobbits bowed low. 'So that  is the King of Rohan!'  said Pippin in 
"should not be known,  until you  are far away. And  you must go, or at least "
himself waits for a sign.' 
Chapter 9. At the Sign of 
"to hand, and under  Gimli's direction  the Westfold-men blocked up the inner "
day.' 
Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all  that 
"     'I shall not find it easy to repay you,' said Jomer. "
""
"wind, and the enemy advanced again. "
"Analiese McCurt,4017954454195,02-03-1987
"
"as soon as may be; but I'm short-handed at  present. Hey, Nob you slowcoach!  "
will let no man handle him.' 
"forward peering into the  gloom.  The night grew dark,  but the stars  above "
the present.' He got up. 
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and flows south-west through 
and he went!' 
     `But Smjagol said  he  would be very  very good.  Nice  hobbit! He took  
Thorin  came  last-and  he  was  not  caught  unawares.  He  came  expecting 
 
"""True, true,"" said Thorin. "
"Faina Ferries,4016134604711,18-07-1977
"
the City.' 
on the Road beyond the foot of the hill. 
dust. 
"Rivendell ahead of you  and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me, "
"Sybila Bernard,4041593887383,27-10-2001
"
"is come from the Black Gate, crossing from the north-east.' "
     'Let me  think!' said Aragorn. 'And now  may I make a  right choice and 
"outnumbered by  the Haradrim alone,  soon their case  became  worse; for new "
"read the will carefully and  snorted. It was,  unfortunately, very clear and "
"     In my own land, in the country of Fangorn, "
"was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed. "
"Fili  or  Kili,  would  come out on  the wall until  it was  their  turn.  It was very dark, "
""
"shout,  if  it was still there  when I had rubbed the drowse out of my head.  "
Merry and Pippin. 
"     The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The goods were "
Mr. Butterbur. 'I  should have warned you before that  all's not well in the 
"     Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder? "
     The white  horse  leaped  forward.  The  hobbits ran  down  the  slope. 
upon them of finding  and returning.  May that virtue not wholly  fail under  
thought Bilbo  –  and  nipped  hard  at  the  nose  that  stuck  out. There was  a muffled 
king's tower. 
"it were out  of  the ground,  and  to  their amaze  it spoke in  the western "
"heard them,  walking as warily as the little people can. Without the crack of "
"     `Either stop where we are, or  go back,' said Gandalf.  'It is no  good "
great hands upon  the stones. The dead bodies: the emptiness; the dank black 
""
end 
"of Anbrion, and  childless, and  he  came never back. And the stewards  have "
"down. The falling  showers  gleamed  like  silver,  and  far away the  river  "
of the stream.  So it was that he came upon the place where Merry and Pippin 
"     'And  that's  the end of that,'  said Sam. 'A nasty end,  and I  wish I "
bed.' 
     At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly;  but a change came over his 
don't  know  without  going  to  see.  From  what  it  says  on  the  map  I  should  guess 
"last they came to  the Silent Street,  Rath  Dnnen, between  pale  domes and "
evidently  prefer. But even from the points of view of many who have enjoyed 
 
     He  sprang to his feet and issued some orders. At once the men who were 
"""Lumme, if I knows! What are yer?"" "
"Toma Simmen,4639670187821997,07-07-1995
"
"diner's  chair. Only  when they had finished and were preparing to rest, was "
"for  you?  The Bree-folk used  to be fair-spoken to travellers,  or so I had "
"     Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle! "
fall has dismayed our enemies.' 
"unsheathed.  There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered. "
"     'But I doubt  not,  lor d,'  said the Warden, 'that you would learn more "
awake he was not pleased at all. 
"     Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth, "
"line, went two of the large fierce uruks, cracking lashes and shouting. File "
"the world, and the Entwives gave their thought to other things, for the Ents "
older and  more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide 
behind. The  ponies were already  there huddled  in a corner; and  there were all  the 
"And he looked  out, and in the growing light he saw the banner of  the king,  "
but meal and water enough to last u s into battle.' 
Barrow-wights of  the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had  been heard. But it 
"     With that he sprang forth nimbly, and  then Frodo noticed as if for the "
Chapter 6. Lothlurien 
still a great company and were well provided  with all that they needed; and  
sparing and took only enough to moisten their dry mouths. 
""
"when such a time will come again."" "
"malice  and her misery, and  in slow years of darkness  healed  herself from "
had  seen from the other side was only its topmost turret. Its  eastern face 
was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine. 
"them."" "
"     `That  is all that I shall venture on for the  present,' said  Gandalf. "
"from  the  South;  and  it  cheered  them  greatly  in  their  plight.  That was as well,  for "
that was all. 
"thought of most things; and though he could not do everything, he could do a great "
"with  spear and bow  and sword. They were  clad in  cloaks of dark grey, and "
"Ashla Twydell,4041375444999,02-06-1994
"
"ago, and was now thick and  tail, for it  was constantly tended. It  ran all "
"Don, and back at the  end to  Horse -men's road. Wild Men will show  you that "
"Let us hope we shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can "
"many more years, as will be seen in this book. "
"adventure long ago, and went to the same tune: "
Pippin who stood behind Prince Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief.  
     Sam and  Peregrin had not been  idle. They  had explored the small dell 
"Frank Easterby,4041377404527835,16-07-1998
"
"Mallissa Oxer,4661033075297,26-10-1977
"
"     'The Gate  is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill  to "
"no  breath  in  his  body,  and  his  head was  going  round;  so  there  he  lay  for  a while "
"     `They are made of hithlain ,' said the Elf, `but there is no time now to "
"Roanna Fedorski,4548342377243,08-07-1983
"
"was tall and black-like, and he  stooped aver me. I reckon it was one of the "
the gems on it glittered like stars.  and the sound of the shaken rings  was 
"Tasia Cherrie,4041370702573,05-01-2001
"
####-<h4>Chapter 6 </h4> <br>
""
"     Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who "
"nasty bony little fishes, for a  poor creature, and they say  death. So wise "
mine.  I  am  not  over  fond  of  dwarves;  but  if  it  is  true  you  are  Thorin  (son  of 
"light was more dim  than ever as they drew nearer to  the  beleaguered city, "
alone before the doors of the silent house. 
scattered heads  and limbs. The place stank of death. A snarl  followed by  a 
"     'And then we can have some rest and  some sleep,' said Sam.  He laughed  "
"way  south-west till you come to Cair Andros, and  if that is still  held by  "
"####-Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from time beyond record. "
"less dark than what is to come, and that  is  my care.  But unless you  have "
""
"front  of  them,  only  one  vast  slope  going  slowly  up  and  up  to meet  the  feet  of  the "
"the  paper,  and  he  never  told  me  yours;  so  on  the  whole  I  think  I  ought  to  be "
"about, I am sure. He knows we shan't agree to his going east. And  he doesn't  "
ways) than you  wandering hobbits have  - more sense in their noses. For they 
feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable. 
"Daisey Sieghart,4017955876792,12-05-1977
"
"""Give me  another  length  of  rope  and  another  hook,""  said  Fili,  and when  they "
"be preserved. For though much has been  saved, much must  now pass away; "
     Saruman looked round at their hostile faces and smiled. 'Kill  him!' he 
"     First name the four, the free peoples: "
     Looking in  the Messenger's  eyes they read his thought.  He was to  be  
     as might of death across the grey 
"     `Then  I need say no more,' said Celeborn. 'But do not despise the lore "
"was  difficult to say. At any  rate the  arms, at a short distance from  the "
"if you take  me; and the  longer we stay in one spot, the sooner it will get "
"     'Then  what the plague  did you  bring  us here  for? '  said  Sam, not "
"finished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out while some are still "
went to the Warden of the Houses of Healing. 
"     The  Shire was  divided  into  four  quarters,  the  Farthings  already "
"Solomon Standish-Brooks,4041374563472788,10-12-1999
"
"more keen. Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that they "
other senses  that  the darkness had sharpened: hearing and smell. He seemed  to be 
"countryside had risen against  them,  and  plainly  meant  to  deal with the "
"back  in  by the door.  Nay,  I do  not think  I  will come  up. But listen, "
"""The whole place still stinks of dragon,"" he grumbled to himself, ""and it makes "
"settled  to  call him Frodo, with  your leave; but it's  not  him , it's her. "
     Farmer Cotton  collected an escort  of some two  dozen  sturdy hobbits. 
could I do?' 
"our trial of strength is not yet come. And if words  spoken  of old be true, "
     RETURN OF THE KING 
They  are  inclined  to  be    at  in  the  stomach;  they  dress  in  bright  colours  (chiefly 
queerest thing  I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that  day and the 
"     Frodo caught something  new  and strange  in  Boromir's glance, and  he "
board. Will you not go to it?' 
of us  may yet meet at times; but I fear that we shall not all  be  gathered 
basket and climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place 
     The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed.  Spear  clashed on  
"were moving slowly along  it,  going westward; and looking again he saw that "
Legolas?' 
Bilbo  pricked  up  his  ears.  He  was  at  last  beginning  to  guess  himself.  He 
"running with bent back and  with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet  "
are stronger and can go your own ways.' 
"you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening's my job at home, sir, if "
""
"""The  Lords of Gondor are come! Let  all leave this land  or yield them up!' "
"     'With  the help of Shadowfax  -- and others,' said Gandalf. 'I rode fast  "
"gollum!  '  It was not until  the moon had  sunk, westering  far  beyond Tol "
"whole affair. It has now come  to the  final point. You have had  your joke, "
"briars. Deep inside there  was  a hollow hall, raftered with dead branch and "
"Candace Atkirk,4041373858257,01-03-1978
"
"     For a  while  the three companions remained  silent,  gazing after him. "
howling and all.' 
     Immediately  afterwards Haldir  came  climbing swiftly  up through  the 
"the king  was laid the great cloth  of gold up  to his breast, and upon that "
"     About her feet, and healed again  "
his foul arts.' 
"give the Enemy more thought, if  the  heralds use that name.' And thereafter  "
will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the  sky above you must beware 
"to Rivende ll now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You  must  "
"get it over,' said Pippin. `This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up?  "
"     `Now, friends,'  said  Haldir, `you have entered the Naith of Lurien or  "
"Barnebas Ree,4835869133798216,21-08-1984
"
"out  of the lower  slopes of the hill, so  that at the rear the second-floor "
His bones are now crumbled; 
"     'One trouble after  another!' said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed "
     The sword glinted in the westering sun. Merry and Sam drew their swords 
"I  am  afraid  that  was  the  last  they  ever  saw  of  those  excellent  little  ponies, "
"Oona Ciccotto,4041597745033,13-02-1990
"
"Lavinie Pindar,4041597515630315,29-05-1996
"
the rocks  far above.  All the ways  into this grot were then sealed against  
gipping for weapons. 
top of the Roll  in all  accounts  stand the names of  Captains Meriadoc and 
""
head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.  
"Evita Smitham,4041377257308,15-04-1995
"
"among them, and  hung on his words and stories of the outlands, and gave him "
"no use. Either you help me to look for him, or I go and leave you here to get out of "
     Frodo took the cloak and fastened the brooch. 'That's better!' he said. 
of his  friends; but  he kept it secret from them as long as he could. After  
"     'Hobbit,' said Pippin.  'Little  service  can I offer to your lord, but "
leaned heavily on his staff. `What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.' 
"####-bother you with any talk. But tell me, are you hurt, or wounded?' "
awaits you. You shall eat and drink with him. When you are ready I will lead 
"his soldiers gnashed their teeth, clashed their shields, and stamped. They knew the "
"Minnaminnie Guerrin,4017953826328,26-06-1995
"
"about him, as if  the hedges  might have ears. ""Nazgyl,""  he whispered. ""The "
"tree-killer!""  Quickbeam is a gentle creature, but he  hates Saruman all the "
"wished. The bed of the stream was there shallow but already broad, and fording it "
aside he followed his  master thr ough the narrow  doorway in the wall of the 
or Gandalf or anyone e lse ever knew about it was beside the purpose. He took 
to their masters and sent them back riderless to the South. 
himself in the best bedroom next to him: 
lost her  whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of 
"looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of  the "
""
"Burn, burn tree and fern! "
"Then  they  went  back,  and  found  Thorin  with  his  feet  on  the  fender  smoking  a "
strength. 
"felt  his heart beat many times before there was any sound. Then  far below,  "
"through  hobbit-lands,  a  wild  respectable  country  inhabited  by  decent  folk,  with "
went steadily down for  a long while before it became level once again.  The  
"above him. He was shaking, and as chilled as stone, but his head burned with fire. "
"Gracia Egel,4041375072892259,05-06-1986
"
""
""
"and put your foot right in it that night of the party, and now you have got to pull it "
     'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai:  we  do not stop  
     Sam said nothing.  The look on Frodo's face was enough for him  he knew 
     Pippin never forgot that hour in the great  hall under the piercing eye 
shoulder.  He  started-but  it was  only  an  old  thrush. Unafraid  it perched by his ear 
"up  and  turned  round  with their backs  to the  hill, breathing  deep, and "
"the windows had been forced  open and were  swinging, and  the curtains were "
fetch  two  beautiful  round  seed-cakes  which  he  had  baked  that  afternoon  for  his 
"Aggi Loving,4041593915002,16-09-1997
"
""
over an outcrop  of grey stone. It  was  icy cold;  and they spluttered  and 
""
we shall learn what kind of thing it is.' 
""
"Aurea Markussen,4017953694648844,30-09-1996
"
"all our  coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste! "
"on, as they halted  a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon  my wondering  what "
####- 
"Wernher Scotchforth,4740824937392553,05-05-1993
"
"the  beginning  of  the  Grey Mountains.  It  was  a  long  and  cheerless  road,  but  now "
especially to get food or slaves to work for them. Then they often got the Wargs to 
Master!' 
"One end of it lashed Sam's hand, and he cried out in pain, starting back and "
shaped like a crowned helm; behind  it was carved upon the wall and set with 
"There lay they long, and many a song "
long; they  will  cool down a little.  when we take our evening drink. What a  
     On the right side of  the  bay there  was a great bed on low legs;  not 
The moonlight glinted here and  there  on the points of spears. The number of 
"seen, though it  was dying down  now to  a  sullen red.  They  picked up two "
something dangerous. For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a 
"on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young  Sun "
     'And what may be the answer to your riddle?' said Thjoden. 
"there had been no king for nearly  a thousand years,  and even the ruins  of "
Suddenly  without  any  warning  he  trotted  splash  into  water!  Ugh!  it  was  icy 
"Xena Oehm,4041593612383031,13-04-1982
"
and  rode  down  into  the West.  But  he  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  have  the 
cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought that  occurs  to 
"grabbed his arms and  dragged them  down, until  Pippin's  face was  crushed "
"     So they  talked  until the  sun  reached  its height, and suddenly  the "
"     Dear Frodo, "
when  you  look  straight  at  them.  They  can  only  be  seen  when  the  moon  shines 
"strange persons  and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the "
as soon as  he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took  
p®kel-shapes so like old Ghvn that Merry  could hardly tell them apart. They 
what  happened  to  the  chief  of  the  guards  and  the  butler.  Nothing  of  course  was 
"growling, baring his fangs. Then once more, orc-fashion, he leapt aside, and "
"     'That's all I know,' stammered  Sam, blushing.  'I learned  it from Mr. "
you! Were you a friend of Boromir?' 
"Smaug  had  left  his  lair  in  silent  stealth,  quietly  soared  into  the  air,  and  then "
glad to have them back.' He loosened his belt from under his cloak  and took  
"Bret Bardwall,4017954581344,13-08-1988
"
you were first up and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.' 
under the barren stones. 
"     As he struggled  on he called again,  and kept on calling more and more "
"Anduin, and ye shall come after  me. And when all this land is clean  of the "
"that  had  borne him  all the  way  from  Minas  Tirith, and was  now called "
"when the  travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly into the plain, "
"     'The hasty  stroke  goes oft astray,' said Aragorn. 'We must press  our "
"Muffin Sivewright,4743596371737769,12-11-1993
"
"under  his  great Shadow, his most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a  "
"was quiet again, except for the cold rustle of the wind. "
"had almost passed  when  suddenly Aragorn  st ood  up, and  called in a  loud "
"vigour  to marvel at. Time wore on,  but it seemed to  have little effect on "
"Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It  is a rich and pleasant land, and its "
fields of Rohan  with no idea of where he was in all the  endless miles? 'No 
looking  straight at Bilbo  when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of 
heart  of Gimli  the Dwarf. Elves  may see  things otherwise.  Indeed I have 
"Lawrence Klimko,4017953210817311,03-01-1985
"
they are.' 
"brought them to a halt. Unbelievable, but unmistakable. Water trickling. Out "
"hung; but  torn by some gust of wind out of the world, or else moved by some "
wry face.' 
gently  down  from  Helm's Gate  to  Helm's Dike.  Thence it  fell into  the 
"Mountain,  days  which  most  people  now  remembered  only  as  a  very  shadowy "
enemies. 
"the very edge of the Wild, as some of you may know. Hidden somewhere ahead of "
sheds and workshops. 
"interested. You  see,  in  the  old  days  he  had  known  the  very  part of  the mountains "
"     'That should not have  been said  outside Lurien, not even to me,' said "
"trust you, not as far as I could kick you; but be off. Or I  shall hurt you, "
"were, gaunt and leggy below but thick above, and already  putting out yellow "
"being  found. In evil hands it might have done great evil. Worst  of all, it "
"""Now  you  are  in  for  it  at  last, Bilbo Baggins,""  he  said  to  himself.  ""You went "
"wherever it was possible, and running, almost bent to the ground, across any "
Now dark and ominous it loomed up in the night. 
"last  stand by both doors,'  he  said; 'but there were not many left by that "
"find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves  here, and Elves there! Some like "
     to sail the shoreless skies and come 
"fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril  and steel, and its streets "
"branches of an enormous oak that grew right out into the path, and up he had to go "
"hands were  spread upon his knees, and his eyes  were closed. At  last  when "
"mean nine, or else you haven't told me yet all the names of your party."" "
of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlurien.' 
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked  up hopefully. But Aragorn  and Boromir 
"     Sam put his ragged orc-cloak under  his master's head, and covered them "
time. So ended the  attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The 
"hoping against hope, to give them back.' "
     The vision  melted  into  waking; and  there  was  Tom whistling like a  
sigh  was heard  again all the long  night.  The  Company camped  beside the 
"might  be found; and the great part of this force should be on foot, because "
"Bing Bridgstock,4017957751258,21-06-1984
"
"the dim sky fell the winged shadows, the Nazgyl stooping to the kill. "
evil things might well be happening in the  Shire.  Remember that the Mirror 
"despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did "
"daring to halt. This  happened many  times, and on one  occasion arrows fell "
could  the  dwarves  heard  the  cries  and  howls  getting  closer  and  closer.  Soon  they 
our fellowship was broken.' 
but  before long  Sam could see for himself what was  approaching. Flocks of 
"Sword has passed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir, ere I  "
     'The name meant  that which looks far away. The Orthanc-stone was one.' 
"     Legolas  gazed  ahead, shading  his eyes from the  level shafts  of the "
The  next  morning  was  a  midsummer's  morning  as  fair  and  fresh  as  could  be 
"rain to come; but the light was broadening quickly,  and the red  flowers on "
until you are made whole  again. Great gladness  it is to see you wake again  
tell  them  that  Thorin  was  also  a  prisoner  with  him.  It  was  Bilbo  who  found  that 
the  air. From  mead to mead  the  bridge sprang. Figures stood there at its 
said with a low bow.  
His wealth shall flow in fountains 
leave you  to reflect  on  the history of tongues.  And so now must I. For I 
hiding till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone first to talk to them. They won't be 
"Chetwood,  a  track  plain  to  see.  They  turned  right  and  followed  it "
"'Don't  draw attention  to yourself,  or  I may forget my orders.  Curse the "
Chapter 2. The Council of Elrond 
hissing to himself.  
"Findegil,  King's Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It  is an exact copy "
"Ofella Klempke,4017952477792,03-08-1986
"
"the valley is jolly,  "
"merely  a captain of  war. But alas! sir, we do not keep  this  thing in the "
"of the traffic went out along the chief highway,  and that turned south, and "
"""O  no!  Not  a  bit  like  storks-forks,  I mean,""  said Bilbo  sitting up  and  looking "
"know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should "
Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived: 
"     Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.' "
"displayed it as she turned towards the Harlond. There flowered a White Tree, "
waylaid and  almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards the 
to its bare unbroken rim. 
"part,  but  all well and fairly,  made:  round platters, bowls and dishes of "
is not yours and has journeyed  far with me.  Wrap the weed in a rag of your  
"Joel Riehm,4041372718842921,17-12-1984
"
"the best there, it  was discovered and selected by your humble servants.' He "
"a rush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber. "
 
"Caesar Glabach,4041378127578238,01-06-1996
"
     in Mordor where the shadows are. 
amazement  not out of surprise at their return so much as in wonder at their 
"     Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry's room, and there  they found  Aragorn "
"""Light!"" he cried. ""Can anybody make a light?"" "
"####-heard a voice, remote but clear, crying: "
"book, and the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow "
"Laurette Lowell,4017957338445,16-08-1989
"
"     'Come, friend Frodo!' said Tom. 'Let us get out on to clean  grass! You  "
"     'Quick, Sam!  Over we  go!'  cried Frodo. They scrambled  on to  the low "
"grim  dark  band, four score at  least of large, swart, slant-eyed Orcs with "
"You  stand  between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless!  "
"     `The pass,  Sam! ' he  cried, not heeding the shrillness of  his voice, "
"meet as many men as you may, while there is yet time.' "
there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges.' 
"together, though the bonds were cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Orc to one "
very difficult or very alarming. 
stop!' 
for a hungry hobbit? ' 
"says nay; and all my limbs are light, and a hope and joy are come to me that "
"now, fair guests!'  she said. 'And hold to your purpose! North with the wind "
was 
"     As the terrible cry ended, falling back  through a long sickening  wail "
"Zechariah McNamee,4041371715228,05-12-1978
"
"But,  of  course,  Gandalf  had  made  a  special  study  of  bewitchments  with  fire "
"     He  struggled  a little, quite  uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting near "
"     Gandalf stood  up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. 'Listen, "
"Nor did he. Balin was overjoyed to see the hobbit again, and as delighted as he "
"flushed softly as with health returning, but it was only a mockery of hope. "
"hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall. "
"swerved, passing by  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  leading  the  host  back  "
flitted  across they  glanced  back  and saw the  great black shape upon the 
"followed Frodo  intently, until he passed  out of sight in the  trees at the "
"kingly  he stood, and it seemed to  them that many years of toil  had  fallen "
"should like  to be there, even if I could not  be of much use: I shall never  "
"the Tower of Gondor  is held worthy in the City, and such men have honour in "
     the Flammifer of Westernesse. 
"to  be  afraid.  They  did  not  know  of  course  how  Thorin  had  escaped,  and  they "
"Zollie Sambals,4041373451078178,28-12-1978
"
"Corine Agus,4401768176865,18-09-1989
"
"     Some of the village-folk had lit  a large fire, just to enliven things,  "
"Englebert Boggs,4041375810280,08-03-1988
"
"all  that  had  happened  to  them  in  the  tunnels,  and  wondering  and  debating  what "
"were grey and still;  and  ever the shadow  deepened before them,  and  hope  "
haven't seen them doing it; nor any one else in the Shire.' 
"     At last  wearied with his cares Sam drowsed, leaving the morrow till it "
darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again. 
"     Gandalf  whistled  and called aloud the horse's  name,  and far away he "
"Betsey Itzchaki,4041378831220762,20-08-1997
"
"Sophey Brecknell,4017950995352456,18-11-2001
"
""
"again began  to climb upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep "
####-killed it with another stroke; and then he fell down and remembered nothing more 
"been destroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, "
"encircled them. A small band  disobeyed  Ugl®k's command, and ran on "
     In the middle of  the  commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo  
"Gabriele Glover,4017959372962,14-05-1981
"
"     The eyes  were hollow and the  carven  beard was  broken, but about the "
"Colby Dansey,4017956719409340,24-11-1999
"
"their post for any cause, save at his own command.' "
both with the grey robe of Lurien; and as he did so his thoughts went out to 
to  Haysend  (where  the  Withywindle flowed  out  of  the Forest  into  the 
"D®nedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South, "
"the stone; and there was a battle, in spite of all your efforts to buy peace and quiet, "
"hugged  a  large black bundle.  In the red  glare  Sam, cowering behind  the "
""
"on once  more,  until the  dawn  began  to  spread  slowly in the wide  grey "
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.' He 
"     i falmalinnar imbl met, ar hnsil "
heels  and just caught him as he ran. He went off with a yelp into the night 
####-the Prince Imrahil and all the chief captains; and there also were Gimli and 
"Gawain Olensby,4041599068319,16-08-1982
"
"Bag End. And if Sam thought himself lucky, Frodo knew that he was more "
"fast about another tree,  and then ran lightly along it, over the  river and "
"on  his arms and legs; his lips  were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He "
"sword, with both hands he  held the  elven-blade  point upwards, fending off  "
"only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I "
"companion, Frodo.' "
"     On  the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting of "
"""What  do  they  say?""  asked Gandalf  and Thorin  together,  a  bit  vexed  perhaps "
and hot again. 
"####-silver and gold  and green, but most were either  white or grey. Three small "
thoughtful. 
"spears.  Aragorn  dismounted and  set Merry on the  ground, and drawing  his "
"road, when I  saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared, "
behind the blindness of his eyes. He felt the cool mud about his toes  as he 
mostly laid on Gandalf. 
they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!' 
"near;  for  they said  that it was a trysting-place  of  the Shadow-men, and "
"huge  and  gnarled,  their  branches  twisted,  their  leaves  were  dark  and  long.  Ivy "
were soiled with black mud. He was still chewing  and slavering. What he was 
master had control of it.  
"There on the grey stone in the grass was an enormous thrush, nearly coal black, its "
"of our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still  stood "
"and silver sea, rippling in endless lines.  "
passed  on through the Isenmouthe. It seemed that in the confusion  and  the 
"Netti Levee,4943728301984,07-06-1983
"
"to call in more than a  hoarse  whisper. Suddenly he stumbled against Frodo, "
"spawned. He longed  only for his master,  for one  sight of his face  or one "
I expect he came  to watch his splendid army march out. When the  Ents broke 
the nightfall. And in that hour the great Battle of  the field of Gondor was 
"captives,  and  cutting  at  the  threads  with  their  knives.  Soon  all  would  be  free, "
"Camala Dare,4041593387657,29-04-1992
"
Mount Mindolluin lifted its  white helm and snowy cloak.  Armed men  went to 
that they ever knew.' 
believe. 
resist the  Rings far longer  than most of the Wise  would believe.  I don't 
"prowl on the east-shore,' said Boromir. `If you go forward, peril  will grow "
ever. 
"Koo Cheeld,4182605071200,21-06-1984
"
still  singing  in  the  cellar  above.  Then  suddenly  the  trapdoors  fell  to with a boom 
     And the bone he boned from its owner! 
"     Arrows thick  as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell "
"And isn't sitting on the door-step your job, not to speak of getting inside the door? "
control.' 
lords speak our speech at need; yet for  the most part they hold by the ways 
Ambar-metta! 
"     There chisel clove, and graver wrote; "
"when that comes, the pity  of Bilbo may  rule the fate  of many -  yours not "
"Middle-earth. I  hope indeed,  Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and "
"     'Then, Mithrandir, you  had a  foe to  match you,'  said Denethor. 'For  "
lord of the cave. It made no trouble whatever of cutting through the goblin-chains 
"Ere  many  hours  were  past,  the  banner-bearers  returned,  and  trumpeters  stood "
"Gloin  lit  several  more  torches,  and  then  they  all  crept  out,  one  by  one,  and "
"Marthe Wookey,4891934411230,26-11-1977
"
####-Chapter I <br>
"Louisette Derwin,4793089426436412,05-11-1988
"
"     'What burden do you bear, Men of Rohan?' he cried. "
""
"Merrick Kubat,4041373276781,03-04-1986
"
"are wondrous fair to look upon, or so 'tis said.' "
"footprints of two hobbits, one somewhat smaller than the other. "
"Phaidra Konertz,4041596560956500,30-05-1996
"
"last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.' "
great horn and frowning. At length he spoke. 
"     'Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with "
"Philippe Connelly,4017952694987582,14-01-1994
"
     They  turned  and ran. At  that  moment some dozen Orcs that  had  lain 
flames to quiver. 
"dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned  keen and merciless eyes;  "
bring anything that Pippin left behind. Make haste!' 
"     'It will  be drier above,' said  Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see  how "
their refuge  were white  humps and domes and shapeless deeps beneath  which 
     Nai elyl hiruva. Nambril! 
"     Tom Bombadil burst out  laughing.  'Well,  my little fellows!' said he, "
"and death; or that even now, as they knew  well,  they had  little chance of "
"Sheff Hoxey,4041598868396,14-04-2001
"
the forest: only three returned. 
don't  doubt  they were mostly full of treasure  he had picked up in foreign 
####-the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of  the birches and lit the northward 
hour of your coming.' 
     And  so  despondently Merry now  stood and watched the mustering of the 
"secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago,  when he  still lived in "
lore: The hands of the king  are  the hands of a healer. And so the rightful 
     his shining shield was scored with runes 
"     'Well, I  call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,' said  Frodo  to "
"for  blind  fish,  which  he  grabbed  with  his  long  fingers  as  quick  as  thinking.  He "
enthroned in the midst of a pool. 
"opened  out  on  every  side,  wound  far  underground  and  had  many  passages  and "
"heard of  it was a noise  like a hurricane coming from  the North, and  the pine-trees "
####-everlasting  groan  of  overburdened stone. And  so  at the last Gwaihir the 
####-into the others.' 
"     'Yes,  I do,' said  Bilbo. ""Though that flash was surprising: it  quite "
"impassable. No sign of gate or entrance,  not a fissure or crack could Frodo "
spears and called the dwarves to halt. 
"     'If what I have done  displeases you, my father,' said Faramir quietly, "
Frodo had saved his life in the only way he could. What else could he do? -- 
"     'Hullo, Sam!' said Rosie. 'Where've you been I They said you were dead;  "
of any like this black fellow. 
reached a hundred  as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the 
"marvels of the Northern  World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say! "
""
battle was  going to  begin. But nothing of  the sort.  All Saruman's people 
rose  and sighed. 'Hither  shall the flowers of  simbelmynl come never  unto 
"hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!' "
"and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if  you want to.' "
and 
 
"least  it  had  been  dry.  ""To  think  it  will  soon  be  June,""  grumbled  Bilbo  as  he "
"mine, and your treasure remain with you to the end!' "
After  all  the  others  had  ordered  their  breakfasts  without  so  much  as  a  please 
"Donn Airdrie,4041593729379,10-05-1992
"
clouds. 
"Lacee Slyford,4041593289242,08-07-1977
"
"     'Leagues  upon  leagues,'  answered  Gandalf.  'Thrice as  far  as  the "
"Proudfoot's  grandson),  who had  begun an  excavation in the larger pantry, "
"     They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but "
"crack,  before  you  could  say  tinder  and  flint.  But  not  Gandalf.  Bilbo's  yell  had "
drop by chance: it  was  cast away as  a token to  any that  might follow. I 
bolster down the  middle of  each bed.  And I made a  nice imitation of your  
two  candles that he lit and carried before them the landlord's face  looked 
"Penny Shury,4041590569772778,31-05-1991
"
the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.' 
"     'They are the shepherds of the trees,' answered Gandalf. 'Is it so long "
"     'Yes,' said the wizard. `Some of the scouts have been sent out already. "
"would  sell  by  auction  the  effects  of  the  late  Bilbo  Baggins  Esquire,  of  Bag-End, "
"     The  dusk was deep  when at length  they  set  out,  creeping over  the "
go away from here and hide somewhere safer. Smjagol wants master to go. 
"they were  trolls. Obviously  trolls.  Even Bilbo,  in  spite  of  his  sheltered  life,  could "
ground. Sam drew his sword. 
     `But Gandalf has revealed to u s that  we cannot destroy it by any craft  
"Out  jumped  the  goblins,  big  goblins,  great  ugly-looking  goblins,  lots  of "
hobbits! Smjagol brings them  up secret  ways that  nobody else  could find.  
"catching his strange voice among the clamour  of the men of the City, turned  "
down. 
"     'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever come "
"but Bilbo had usually given new presents, and  kept  those that he received. "
"will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled by one.' "
"     Sam  heard a burst  of hoarse singing, blaring of horns  and banging of "
"     Gollum moved  quickly,  with his  head and  neck  thrust forward, often "
####-Brandywine. But what have  horses to do with it?' I'll tell you later. Let's 
"and all,"" said a voice. Bert and William thought it was Tom's. "
"Zelda Oleksiak,4041592132476,29-04-1995
"
"round  here, and  there are bogs and  all  kinds of difficulties down in the "
""
"     At last, weary and feeling finally defeated, he sat on a step below the "
"they sought to pass him  by and enter. And then a  voice came out of him, as "
"but an honest  fool,  you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might  have done "
"     The four hobbits stepped  over the  wide  stone  threshold,  and  stood "
"before, though now it seemed many years ago. Then he knew that the hope that "
"'They were  borne by  the hobbits.  Doubtless the  Orcs despoiled them,  but "
"Gandalf. I  beg that there should be  no vote,  until we  have slept on  it. "
"Philis Lachaize,4041593966437482,16-12-2001
"
"mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though  not  "
"glinted  in  their  pale  flowing  hair.  They  were  hemming the  Orcs  in, "
####-can feel something looking at us.' 
"stone basin in the floor between the trees, and thence it spilled and flowed "
"     At its  head there rode a  tall  and evil  shape, mounted  upon a black  "
tonight. But be ready to my call as soon as the Sun is risen.' 
more.' 
"Sam ha d more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up "
"deep abyss by a vast bridge of iron, and then passing  into the plain it ran "
"Past the rushes, past the reeds, "
"silent about her, and a while  she looked upon her guests. At last she spoke "
have a mind.' 
"showed up, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam pointing to the left. 'It seems like a dream "
"Meris Dando,4494467757838,02-04-2001
"
"cloak, a veil before the eyes of the  Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs "
"Glendon Wildt,4041594185238487,30-01-1975
"
"just yielding  to the temptation to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly "
"Chelsae Juggings,4552661618203,12-08-1989
"
frying bacon and eggs  in his own kitchen at home  - for he could feel inside that it 
     The  rest of that day they  spent  scrambling over  rocky  ground. They 
"Kienan Swyn,4041593996598,02-01-1992
"
"     'You  have  still got the ring in your pocket,' said the wizard. 'Well, "
"     'Never you mind,' said Sam. `If you  can't guess, you'll soon find out. "
long been silent. But most of the dwarves were more practical; they gathered gems 
beyond. Deep shadow lay before its feet. Sam sniffed the air. 
     Down from the door where it began. 
out scouts to spy upon the road; but old Ghvn shook his head. 
just  about to seize  him; and a rumour came after him lik e the shadow-sound 
are never tired  of reciting  your own verses.  But really  we cannot answer  
spirit crumbles.' Then stepping softly towards Pippin he looked down at him. 
walls. But slowly all sound of it died away. 
""
low wall of the  mill-yard. He was grimy -faced and  black -handed.  'Don't  'ee 
     And one of the guards answered: 'The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses 
"horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs, and suddenly "
upward had  shown him that there was no hope of  climbing it. The stone-work 
"Keelia McElhargy,4041376228491103,02-10-1978
"
"riders from Cair  Andros of all  that  was done, and the City made ready for  "
"     They  walked   slowly,  stooping,  keeping  close  in  line,  following "
are coming. What's happened to your  precious  Nazgyl?  Has  he had  another  
half-strangled water-courses.  Among  these  a cunning eye  and  foot  could 
     'The eagle!' said  Legolas. 'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the 
     'No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.' 
never been like this  before. What is it all  about? It is mine isn't it?  I 
     Following  his  lead the Company  passed under the  northern arch. They 
tied. There were several labels of this sort: 
"now the number  of our  Company that set out fr om Rivendell, and the kind of "
"####-trowels,  and the creak of wheels. Torches and flares glowed dully here  and "
"to the king's  house, you shall see for  yourself. Will  you not come? Do  I "
""
"     'There is no need to come yet, if you don't want to,'  said Frodo. 'But "
"your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.' "
"their  dreams; and  the  watchers  listened  to all that  they said,  hoping "
"     'Then let us do first what we must do,' said  Legolas. 'We have not the "
####-the counsels of the Wise and  the Great. 
"pay and praise in Lugb®rz,  and leave  us to foot it as best we  can through "
"Skell Emmens,4041593708720,12-06-1984
"
traffic to  the Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour  or 
are  no  use:  things  have  changed  for  the  worse  and  the  road  is  unguarded.    They 
"of the  Mountains,  and maybe beyond. For men you shall have  Aragorn son of "
"the many-windowed house, fronted along its whole  width by  a pillared porch "
who had to mow the grass.  
"     'I do not understand all this,' he said. `Saruman is a traitor, but did "
hidden 
"     Gandalf  stayed in the Shire for over two months.  Then one evening, at "
     'Alas! ' said Aragorn. `Gandalf the Grey fell into  shadow. He remained 
came to the  east  end of the village they met a barrier with  a large  board 
"     `There, Sam! He will have quite as  much chance of escaping wolves  and "
"Sibel Kytter,4644552730272683,23-01-2001
"
     'Why not?' said Pippin. 
####-     For east or west all woods must fail... 
"lay; and it was only when  he  returned that I first thought he was changed, "
"Uta Whatman,4041375128802484,10-02-1985
"
"bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.' "
"threatening us?"" asked Bard grimly.  "
####- 
into  the clouds. Before the  daylong dusk ended and true  night  came again 
"friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of "
perhaps the delay will prove useful  - it may have put them off our trail.' 
"pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the "
"rooms devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining-rooms, all were on the same floor, and "
"so he thought,  he  heard the two captains' voices talking  again.  He stood "
"this  hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why "
had better be going on.' 
defence of Gondor and Rohan!' 
"ring  of trees,  and they blew a great fanfare, and the heralds cried aloud: "
could shout.' 
"Carlin Boules,4041598520864,24-12-1981
"
"     On  September  20th  two  covered  carts  went off  laden  to Buckland, "
him.' 
their own language. They smiled at  him  and said laughing: 'Here is a jewel 
would  affect their lot. Of  loftier mould these two were made: reverend and 
"####-""He wouldn't make  above  a mouthful,""  said William, who  had  already  had  a "
"first, as  the main road  did,  until  climb ing  above  the meads of  deadly "
"undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at "
"I  reached the Shire when  Frodo  was on the  Barrow-downs, though I set out "
"     'Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you  I'm "
     'I will  stop it!' he boomed. 'And  you shall come  with me. You may be 
"     By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,  "
say.' 
"Phoebe Hufton,4041598721661722,14-09-1979
"
"many engines  had been burned  or cast into  the fire-pits, and many  of the "
"Stevie Barbary,4041598380979191,18-09-1989
"
"the search for  Frodo  began.'  He returned  to the bank, close to where the "
clear which is the road that  we must take. The westward road seems easiest.  
plunged  into an account of Boromir's last fight and the orc-march from Emyn 
"great pile of  helms and mail, cloven shields, and broken swords,  bows  and "
     'Rope!'  he  muttered. `No  rope!  And  only  last night  you  said  to 
"weary but proud, followed their  tireless leader, a grey shadow before  them "
is  all  that  there  were  up  the  trees.  Now  perhaps  we  can  finish  this  story  without 
"comfort,  and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: "
"look beyond the  River,  back to Gondor, to  their friends, to the lands  of "
     Hee now! See now! 
"     `It's good  to be able to see again,' said Frodo,  breathing  deep. `Do "
"     `Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she? ' "
N®menoreans became  mingled with that of lesser men. Then the watch upon 
"     They were  just in time. Sam and  Frodo were  only  a few steps up, and "
of woodlands.  
"cheers. Cries  of  Yes  (and  No). Noises  of trumpets and horns, pipes  and "
"they made it into a place of dread; and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower  "
"Crickhollow, if it can be helped.' "
"I spoke of. Upon this very ring  which you have here seen  held aloft, round  "
"never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had  returned at night, and had gone "
bed  that  a wide pool  stretched  from  the mountain-wall to the head of the fall over 
to go back to down below.  
"had  sat silent  beside  Bilbo's  empty  chair,  and ignored all remarks and "
"Sackville-Bagginses  as may be,'  some added.  But  so firmly fixed  had the "
sleep. 
"You are a ruffian and a fool. Down on your knees in the road and ask pardon, "
     'Ah!' said Sam. 'And where will they live? That's what I often wonder.' 
but  the Shire-folk knew nothing about  it. To them  he was just one  of the 
     'Well?' said Strider. 'When are  you  going to open that letter?' Frodo 
"Girion of Dale,  and  in your hoard  is mingled much of  the wealth of his halls  and "
"edge of Mirkwood, you would  take  the word of no one  that you did not know  as "
"     As before Legolas was first afoot, if indeed he had ever slept. 'Awake!  "
""
"Mountain lying without guard or owner, and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of "
"somehow, when it came  to it,  I found I had so much to do here; and packing "
     Go riding like a swan. 
"battle-axes; grim-faced they were, and shorter  and  somewhat swarthier  than "
"the sooner  to rest,'  he said  haltingly, finding no  better  words to say. "
"     'I will,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff!  "
bitter comfort of that last sight Sam  turned and hid the light and stumbled 
-- and it's my  opinion that  in Lurien he first  saw clearly what I guessed 
"waste, there will be  few gardens in  Middle-earth that will bloom like your "
"Clarence Fenner,4041599232186563,01-12-1975
"
"though  I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You  have "
when all the Orcs perished -- it is with those little riddles that the great 
####-sing us something that we haven't heard before!' 
that was kept  at that point where the way from Anurien and  Rohan  ran into 
"     And then he bent his own  neck and put the chain upon  it, and  at once "
"####-     And though we pass them by today, "
"Wingless flutters, "
fire came down the  long slopes towards them. Soon they would be engulfed. A 
laughed aloud. 
####-flesh off you! If the enemy  doesn't get them  first. They've done in Number  
Send them down the hall to roll ! 
"rejected  us, so as  to  avoid  that very thing! What he will  do in such  a  "
stars. Then  the hurrying water of  the Forest River swept all the company of casks 
to Boromir 's side and drew himself up to his full height. 
"the great round  pit had been  made, where Shelob had  taken up her abode in "
- if  they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful  with it. 
"bitter for laughter.  Nay, it is the last  move in a great jeopardy, and for "
among the dead stones.  
"They waited a moment or two, and still there were no dragon-noises, no sound "
moment.' He got down and searched  in  the bag at his saddle. Then he handed 
"all  at  once,  so  sudden  and  sweet  that Bilbo  forgot everything else, and was  swept "
was much  shouting as well as  the music of harps and of  fiddles mixed up with  it. 
"     'No need to  try,'  said Pippin. 'I was going to tell you: I've managed "
thing! Isn't it enough  to have orcs by the  thousand  without that stinking 
"this City in peace,  and leave my chair to  a son after me, who would be his "
"Kristoforo Pettipher,4017951808919671,27-02-1982
"
spoiling. That's my orders.' 
"then when a  chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after  "
the mountains  in the  South. A keen wind was blowing from  the North again. 
####-devour so many good Riders of the Mark?' 
"     'I am sure you  have given me all the heaviest stuff,'  said Frodo.  'I  "
own  counsel  against  the menace of the East.' He turned his  dark  eyes on 
"now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done "
"put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight  would miss him, and he might find "
"     Their  farewells had been  said in the great hall by the  fire, and they "
"this Thing, the Thing  that drove your  brother mad with  desire? What spell  "
Pippin felt  once  more the  strain between  their wills;  but now almost it 
"evil,  not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine "
""
"     'It is  not madness, lady,' he answered; 'for I go on a path appointed. "
"among men of war, that here was one whom no Rider of the Mark would "
"it seemed to them that, black  against  the pall of cloud, there rose a huge "
"Kent Porrett,4041594626673,03-05-2000
"
Hobbiton. But I can't see them now.' 
"Shaylyn Hartas,4017957077191,29-11-1987
"
few left in Minas Tirith who had the heart to stand up and defy the hosts of 
"secret  entrance.  You  see  that  rune  on  the  West  side,  and  the  hand  pointing  to  it "
"current market value; and they can't make a thing for themselves, not even mend a "
uncanny darkness. 
"     The  black  horses were  filled  with madness, and leaping  forward  in "
one thing.' 
"Glade in front of  us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved "
"from the black East and chill, but a few were walking on the quays, and watching, "
at least  others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back down the 
     A  hush fell  on the hobbits  beyond the  gate. 'It  won't do  no  good 
"now, then I suppose our agreement can be said to be over. You have done what "
direction there was a wide open space with only one fire. 
"tale. Take any one that you're fond of. You may know, or guess, what kind of "
     The Tower trembles; to the tombs of kings 
and  anyway  the  night  has  come  and  it  is  cold.  But  I  feel  it  in my  bones  that  this 
"William's. But  it wasn't. For  just  at  that moment  the  light  came over  the hill,  and "
     'Well!' said  Merry. 'I  never expected  to see those again! I marked a  
"Lucas Siemon,4017952041025524,07-07-1998
"
dark canopy and passed high above them. As it went it sent out a long shrill  
"     'Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing which "
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream. 
"Moira Waren,4041372039479,28-05-1989
"
water  they had a difficult and very nasty  job  finding which were  the  right barrels. 
Thorin  could  cry  out  three  of  the  dwarves  had  leaped  to  their  feet  and  loosed  off 
"They called for more ale, and  began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master! "
"     'No,' she said. `I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am  not a  "
steadily up  towards  the slopes of the mountains. Many of the  trees seemed 
future in return for the Elvenking's aid. 
meaning nothing bu t good; for it warmed all hearts to see them go  riding by 
even as the main blow is approaching from the East. Yet a treacherous weapon 
"Maximilien Batterham,4017950141216688,18-12-1987
"
stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to -- that which is beyond.' 
"walked and prowled all about them, and they heard the howling of wolves. The "
"long  ago  in  the Marish  of the Shire, but now it was grown  in  power and "
see him off.' 
outside filtering through  the window-slit.  But here  the stair stopped and 
Doom. 
merciful.' 
"galenas by the  noble,  and  other names  in other tongues more learned, and "
"Nori,  Ori,  Oin,  and  Gloin  were  their  names;  and  very  soon  two  purple  hoods,  a "
been  breathed  by any  living thing and came  new-made from snowy 
paper). 
"     'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and your road lies with him, I  think, Merry. But "
 
"Scotti McGrorty,4654574626571983,26-11-2001
"
     'As  for the longer road:  we cannot  afford the time. We might spend a  
gently and firmly. 
rider. 'Can't we go and see them?' 
"Loutitia Pasby,4041599523826,08-03-1997
"
answer.  They  were  unpacked  and  helped  ashore where  they  sat  or  lay muttering 
"     In the  westlands  of Eriador, between  the  Misty  Mountains  and  the "
"     'If we had come by  the  main road down from the upper halls, we should  "
"that  he  had  learned,  or what he had meant  to do, once  they were out of  the wood. "
"flash—"" "
southward. 
nose in his heat and terror.  
"     'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,' he said. 'Do you  know "
head with a red hood on:  it was Balin doing  look-out. He could have clapped and 
""
"thought  that Thorin would at once admit what  justice was  in  them. He did not, of "
Jomer then returned and given warning of our coming?' 
of  his coming filled  the enemy with  madness. The  wild men fell on  their 
"     'Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,' said Elladan. "
"     So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall,  only  interrupted "
"in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not "
"I would sooner  walk  than si t  on the back  of any beast so great,  free or "
     le nallon sn di'nguruthos! 
"     'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain  'Said the "
     Whether the morning and evening of  one  day or of many days had passed 
"them, and most of all at their beards. "
"filth! Never leave your master, never,  never: that was my right rule. And I "
is waiting; and the Shire is my home.' 
"Cari Hellikes,4017955541610,09-12-1993
"
of Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!' 
 
"the  naming of Aragorn. `He lied on me, yes he did. I did  escape, all by my "
"my hobbits! You  should  come safe to your own homes now, and I shall not be "
cold roads to the  very gates of  His country.  Lots  of  His people will be 
"     'It will be more needed  where it is bestowed,' said Aragorn. 'With him "
"whether  they  should  roast  them  slowly,  or mince  them  fine  and  boil  them,  or  just "
"sideways into  the creature's face. Gollum hissed and spat, but  he did  not "
     Still Thjoden  did not  answer.  Whether he strove with anger or  doubt 
there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land? ' 
"feeling full and  comfortable  again,  and he  felt he  could  sleep  contentedly,  though "
"and he  turned his back on his adventure. The Tookish part was getting very tired, "
"Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes,  Sandheaver, and Tunnelly,  many of which "
"wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than  Saruman's.  Anyway they "
"Emelyne Mishow,4477360588490288,15-10-1987
"
"brown leaves  of a former year,  like dry  hands with long splayed  fingers;  "
"####-added:  `Your breakfast is  ready,' he  would hardly  have  been  surprised. "
lair.  The Mountain  lay  dark  and  silent  before  them  and  ever  higher  above  them. 
"     'You have talked long  in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and "
"     'Maybe,' said  Gandalf. `But  I du not know yet exactly  where  we are. "
""
"Bron Dennant,4017954663177757,28-06-1990
"
secretly dreaded: the   noise of marching feet. It was still some way  behind 
company walk in our daily  fields; and folk speak with the  Lady of the Wood 
"Hartley Segrave,4041590786853229,07-01-1986
"
"     The land had changed. Where before the green dale had  lain, its grassy "
anything  small enough for the likes of us.  We'll have  to make do.  But we 
"Now  if you wish,  like  the dwarves,  to hear news of Smaug, you must go back "
"and dried fruit, but Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep. The hobbits "
     And whither then? I cannot say. 
"as  they  could.  ""Where's  old  Galion,  the  butler?""  said  one.  ""I  haven't  seen  him  at "
"Mohammed Fortnum,4555264559831,03-11-1983
"
delight of  those  that have been wafted  suddenly  from bitter winter to  a  
"waked, "
"Ermanno Attack,4041370127657781,30-10-1981
"
"ring of gold with a  great blue stone, Vilya, mightiest of  the  Three.  But "
their shoulders. `Ya hoi!  ' 
wall and the  sheer brink of  the Rock.  Together Jomer  and Aragorn  sprang 
Nothing was moving on it. Following  its line eastward  with their eyes they  
"     The ruffians  came tramping along  the  East Road, and  without halting "
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly 
"would have felt a lot bolder still, if there had been anything to eat. "
"and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another. "
"     Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land "
had descended many flights of stairs. There was still  no sound  of pursuit. 
"stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon. "
"rode  out clear  again. Then they all  heard the sound of  hoofs, and at the "
"     But  Jomer said: 'Where is the  Lady Jowyn,  my sister; for surely  she "
"he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was  left in  this place where "
have flown away or to have fallen dumb. 
"hastened towards the  House of the Stewards,  looming in the  twilight under  "
"the same sort, rather hastily  written and much damaged, he said; `but I can "
From the inside you may thrust them open with  your  hands. From the outside 
"Nathalie Ivashnikov,4224070342304826,21-02-1993
"
"     'I am  afraid  it  will,' said Gandalf. 'We  can't start until  we have "
moment he felt very crushed. But in slapping all his pockets and feeling all round 
"     'You had the luck, Merry,' said Pippin softly, after a long pause. 'You  "
####-<h4>Chapter 17</h4> <br> 
"taste fish again. Come, Precious is waiting! ' "
hundred  miles  north  of  the  Carrock  nor  to  come  near  my  house  –  it  is  well 
""
"also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not "
guess. How are our supplies?' 
himself; for there was not a hobbit in the  Shire that was looked after with 
"####-enough, or near  enough, for him to  feel certain that he heard it; but once "
"thought: a hope of glory and  great deeds, and lands far from  the fields of "
####-king could ever be known.' 
"     'No, I did not know of it,' said Frodo. `But the day when you  heard it "
the path with his long fleshless fingers.  'Dusst!' he hissed. 
"of us. Now you others, where are the ropes? Be quick!"" "
"Padriac Forder,4025248048160,11-03-1995
"
"to me and a trouble to my heart. Never in  all my life had I met them, until "
"Judd Mayfield,4041377465422058,10-08-1985
"
as ever rode together upon Arod. 
"     'So do I,' said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. But "
"over. I don't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though, "
and looked  south across the ravine  of the Bruinen. There they sat for some  
durstn't  go  outside this dell  for any money;  I felt that  something  was 
southernmost ranks of the Misty Mountains.  
"in his heart. Aragorn walked behind  him, grim and silent,  stooping now and "
before. But it is nearly finished. When night falls do not  linger near this 
"looked at  their lord  in amazement, and  then  as one  man they  drew their "
the peril of Men! But you are less judges of Men than I of Halflings. We are 
they  drank  it. Eaten after that draught the stale  bread  and dried  fruit 
"panic for the amusement of the eyes, they both turned and fled together; but "
"and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, "
vanished. 
     But  all  save Legolas said  that they  must  now take  their leave and 
crumbled  and  smashed  down.  Flames  unquenchable  sprang  high  into  the  night. 
Footsteps were  approaching.  Now  a  door was being opened  quietly in  the 
"terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were "
"Azog the Goblin —"" "
is far away.' 
"     `You've  got it?' gasped  Frodo. `You've  got  it  here? Sam, you're  a  "
"     Sam had taken no part in  the conversation, though he had listened; and "
     Not Elves; for  the  woodland folk were  altogether noiseless in  their 
"gathered reports  of old times and distant lands  from Elves,  Dwarves,  and "
     At length after fifteen days of journey the wain of King Thjoden passed 
"Teodoor Ogger,4717376830217,28-06-1984
"
on now! Longbottom Leaf it is.  Fill up while I run and see about some food. 
"     'Then  he must be a noble beast indeed,' said Aragorn; 'and  it grieves "
shadow  of  the Mountain. But we  none of us liked the idea of the Front Gate. The 
"gollum."" "
"conspirators. After  all, you must remember  that we know you  well, and are "
"Lenard Kobieriecki,4017950638705771,02-05-1983
"
"     of folk of Men and Elven-kin, "
"bridge, and  the  coming of the Terror.  'An  evil  of  the Ancient World it "
All the others fled. 
the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had  depleted the 
""
halted  for the night. They were very  weary.  The mountains were veiled  in 
"say at our last meeting?' he asked. 'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?' "
"not be rid of his new  rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befriended by "
"close  at hand. Of all the slaves of  the  Dark  Lord, only the Nazgyl could "
still!  ' 
entangled in it.' 
"Gwendolin Bindin,4041375432820,19-06-1981
"
"Elves cry that cry far back in the deeps of time, and she had not heeded it, "
"     `  ""Yes,  sir, I am afraid so, sir,"" said Butterbur, mistaking me.  ""He "
almost beneath  the great overhanging boughs of  its outer  trees. Their  trunks were 
"think,'  said  Sam.  `We might  find some  nook  there, or  even  a cave  or  "
"trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good  will.  Find it, and "
"misty  star peered out. The three peaks loomed before  them, darkling in the "
"going  to  be  eleventy -one,  111,  a  rather  curious  number  and  a  very "
to him raiment fitting for the beauty and sadness of Jowyn. 
would never have come out again. 
"     `I do not know clearly,' said Frodo; `but the path  climbs, I think, up "
"sat and gaped, and his face went almost green. He was so bewildered that  he "
"The Orc  was slain by horsemen, and later  his body  was hauled to the fire. "
"     They  looked back, but the turn of the  road prevented them from seeing "
done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall 
run like fire in the dark. 
and a chill wind like the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains. But 
"wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue in vain.' "
"Belfalas, dwelt Prince Imrahil  in  his castle of Dol Amroth by the sea, and "
"Peregrin, a very valiant man.' "
"""Ssss,  sss,  gollum!  Goblinses!  Yes,  but  if  it's  got  the  present,  our  precious "
"disappearing  swiftly and silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to "
     And Jomer seeing  that he was sorrowful and weary said: 'First you must  
"     With that the  company said  farewell to the island  and the mound, and "
     When the poor  creature died next Spring-she  was after all more than a  
"     Grishnbkh flung himself on the ground flat,  dragging the hobbits under  "
""
"Dame Wardrope,4017954836118191,12-01-1985
"
Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go home! ' 
other people kept in their pockets. 
"caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they  seemed to  weave a single dance, "
     'True indeed!'  said Gandalf. `And there is  one among them that  might 
same way. The Orc's clawlike hand gripped Pippin's arms like iron; the nails 
"if  he  expected  to  find  his  cloak,  jacket,  and  breeches,  and  other  "
"     With a last despairing effort Frodo  raised  himself on  his hands, and "
"that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider it  sounded-but "
hauled stuff up with ropes. For the issuing of the stream they had contrived a small 
very clever bit of work. 
"too well,'  thought Sam. 'He looks fair famished. Not too dainty to try what "
that there was an opening at the side: for a moment he caught a faint breath 
"appeared  plain and smooth, without  mark or device that  he  could see. The "
for  the end  of the deeds  that you have  shared in has not yet come. A day 
"Genna Yvon,4041377278435883,20-12-1976
"
"it was earthier and  richer, more sustaining and  food-like,  so  to  speak. "
"Terra Firmager,4017957273038772,14-06-1975
"
"the wedding of course,' he said. 'And I have  waited for it long enough. But "
"     As evening fell they were  drawing near to  Frogmorton, a village right "
Gollum was plainly keeping a good deal back. 
its black sheath his small bright blade. Filled suddenly with love  for this 
for the Master   of the house! He will not be long. He is tending  your tired 
"     'What about?' asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name. "
     `Ugh! That smell!' he said. `It's getting stronger and stronger.' 
"the power  of the Three Rings also is ended. And all the lands that you see, "
"####-scattered the ashes, and laid the turves on the hole.  Then he crept back to "
"thickets were faded and falling. It was  a cheerless land, and their journey "
Morannon. Then quietly Gollum drew back and slipped down into the hollow.  
"hope and guess  that both  Merry and  Pippin were  here together. There  is, "
"painted  a  week  ago-,  and  I  am quite  sure you have  come  to  the wrong house. As "
"indeed  broken  a  foot  below  the hilt. 'Not much  use is  it, Sam?'  said "
"He sat  up and then he  saw  that  Frodo  was  lying  beside  him, and slept "
"the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one will be left "
he said. `Then in Gondor we must trust  to  such weapons as we have.  And at 
"     through Folde and Fenmarch and the Firienwood, "
their going was swift. Only five days after the death of the dragon they came upon 
     'What do you think?' said Gimli. 
"     and seven lights before him sent, "
"Brandybuck,  in  return  for  much  hospitality, got a dozen  bottles of Old "
"     'But, though I could not see what was happening  in the dark, I believe "
 
"ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!' he said, shaking his head. "
"it, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly  ruined. He "
"It was  rough going,  for  they  dared not  cross  over  to the  path on the "
     'Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first  grea t assault. 
"tattered. Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was "
to him again. 
"     Beside the falls of Nimrodel, "
piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.' 
"gnawingly  hungry,  and  the  next  thing  was  that  it  was  raining  and  that  here  and "
returning to their own homes.  And Frodo went to the  King as he was sitting 
some  that would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.' 
"Franky Irwin,4578169638848587,04-06-1984
"
"Whitby Kemmet,4041376253292558,01-04-1975
"
"crest of  the Morgai, or anywhere along its  higher levels, pathless as they "
"While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh, "
"downcast eyes,  as if in deep  thought. A great dread fell on him,  as if he "
"     'Well, I've made  up  my mind,  anyway. I  want to see mountains again, "
haste allows.' 
that he did not think Bilbo  was dead. When  they asked: 'Where is he then?' 
"reverence  by  the  mortal  men,  who  lived  to  the  South,  and  were  gradually "
many of them of huge size crawling slowly and stickily along its sides. 
"     `I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course  you are. And I'm coming "
"they could be seen, shadowy  shapes that glinted now and again in the  white "
     And Faramir and Jowyn stood  forth and set hand in  hand; and all there 
""
"     'I feared  it, Sam,' said Frodo. 'We've  trusted to luck,  and  it  has "
"Lodovico Robberts,4041598207251998,19-10-1977
"
should I say your finger?' 
"woods,  so  that men went  abroad without  fear. Beorn  indeed became  a great  chief "
Wormtongue sprawled on his face. 
"Nonetheless as the night  wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in  his "
"     'I know  what you have  been doing,  Sam,' said Frodo,  taking his arm. "
great cloud hangs  over all  the  land between  here  and  the Mountains  of 
"in  the open, and that we are also a scattered people and time is needed for  "
     At last there came  a pause in the  Ent-voices; and looking up they saw 
The hobbits scrambled down a steep  green  bank and  plunged into the  thick 
"Ezri Linger,4041594134361885,30-08-2001
"
"Such a question of course made the king angrier than ever, and he answered: ""It is "
     'You cannot pass! ' he said. 
and  more  into his  old  manner  of  speaking. And Sam  had another growing 
'When you know more you will understand why  you have angered my 
"Ophelie Shawe,4785413575708910,01-12-1982
"
"it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the  inner side.   Over  this "
"     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor by  Saruman. It is  beyond his art, and beyond  "
"""Excuse me!"" said the hobbit, and off he went to the door.  "
"suddenly  befallen  Bilbo. Frodo began to feel  restless, and the  old paths "
you are the  first  dwarf to behold the  trees of the Naith of  Lurien since 
They  found  few of the  enemy before  them. Here and  there they came  upon 
"and company by company,  they wheeled and went off  eastward. And long "
"important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and "
"was indeed as Isildur  guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and  the servants of "
grown wings!' 
"it in his own time and  fashion, so they all accepted  the invitation. 'What "
"     Until it joins some larger way, "
""
"Malynda Baswall,4017951942163012,16-12-1998
"
"     'See here,  Captain! ' He  planted himself squarely in front of Faramir "
and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several 
"lucky,'  said  Frodo. 'Tell Gandalf to hurry along the  East Road: we  shall "
"could see the sunlit garden.   'Or perhaps, yes.  As far as I understand what "
"Arie Gosselin,4041377799969121,27-10-1987
"
"     'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.  "
"loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it  is beyond all doubt  that he "
hours gentleness may be repaid with death.' 
"encompassed  them,  but  of  the  fair  things  they  had seen in the  world "
elves in the gloom with bright lanterns and searched for the cause of the noise. 
"     'I wonder what he is doing,' said Merry. 'The  afternoon is getting on. "
"Zerk Kimmitt,4041596459396,24-07-1993
"
my  grandfather  was  King  under  the  Mountain  again  and  treated  with  great 
"should not be while this war is  fought.  I will not enter in, nor  make any "
Company  that set out from Rivendell; why he had  left Boromir; and where he 
hour northward along the eastern edge of the stony valley. When a grey light 
"Also naughty little boys that play with fire get punished."" He said it to make them "
"Ents to see by,  and suddenly  Quickbeam  gave a  cry  ""The tree-killer, the "
might well  contain us in  battle before the City and yet  strike with great 
and the axes of Isengard.  A thing is about to happen which has not happened 
"the  packages  as  fairly  as  they  could,  though  Bilbo  thought  his  lot  was "
"Tremayne Ridings,4017954782462,06-10-1988
"
gift.' 
"at the hobbit without saying anything, till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even "
"Marquita Oscroft,4017951822351406,22-12-1977
"
"Van Maggorini,4041372127439665,29-09-1975
"
pursues me.' 
the Loudwater that  runs  out of Rivendell. We  have at  least a fortnight's 
     From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming. 
""
carving  out a mighty valley to be a  land  of battle and debate in times to 
"Kelly Perillo,4017952628444,03-01-1986
"
water was loud in the stillness. He put on his cloak and followed Faramir. 
"     'Saruman,' said Galadriel, 'we have other errands  and other cares that "
"     The  assailing  hosts halted, foiled  by the silent menace  of rock and "
"Boris McClary,4017953804403551,05-08-1984
"
wonder. 'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of 
still all was quiet and  peaceful. On  the third day out from Bree they came  
burned. The hosts of Isengard were  advancing in  silence now. Their torches 
house long bereft of lordship and dignity.' 
"hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.' "
"high moon, which was peering down through the smoke-hole in the roof. "
swathed round his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog. 
"     'Of  course, my  dear  Frodo,  it  was dangerous  for you; and that has "
"than  they had; for there was plenty of grass, but there was not much in their bags, "
give good sport?' 
but he ran on.' 
away. We must call for him.' 
to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and  slept the 
"strange-looking  men.  On the benches were  various  folk:  men  of   Bree, a  "
_in  affairs that  are too big for them.'  His  fingers continued  to grope. 
quiet  the matter of Frodo's errand. I will deal with that in due  time. And 
"may eat that, if you will!"" "
gleaming in the moon as he peeped out. 
"Dawn Stubbes,4017959801143,16-11-1976
"
lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.' 
any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?' 
"it. The lodes lead away  north towards  Caradhras, and down to darkness. The "
"watched,  but when morning  came  they  had  not  heard  or  seen  any  sign  of  danger. "
"####-doom-boom, doom-boom, and then  stopped. Gandalf came flying down the  "
"sloping bank,  and  the Road,  now dim as evening drew on, wound away  "
"Bond Dabels,4017953108527170,08-07-1996
"
"can  come  to the  Moontower without fighting big battle at the  bridges, or  "
"Bing de Tocqueville,4041371524614870,08-11-1978
"
"you promised,  and  you're free: free to go back to food  and rest, wherever  "
me!' 
"     Frodo waited patiently for a while,  then he spoke again less  sternly. "
last. We've got to make a dash for it!' 
"Caprice McGee,4017953073659388,28-05-2001
"
full of flowers that came right up to the steps. 
"issue any command  to  you, he begs  you only to remember old friendship and "
     Grishnbkh  began  to  lose his  temper.  The  name  of  Saruman  seemed  
tales be true.' 
"     There was a roar and a crackle, and  the  tree above him  burst  into a  "
its great dome. 
     He was getting  lower now and the  hisses became  sharper  and clearer. 
the right bring up this Ranger of the North to supplant me. 
"explain things again to those that live a  long  way off, far from Isengard, "
"to Frodo that Arwen  turned towards him, and the light of  her eyes  fell on "
"by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the  draught began at the toes, and "
Gandalf. 
"####-First they champ, "
"""That  will  be  the  last  we  shall  hear  of  Thorin  Oakenshield,  I  fear,""  said  the "
####-<h4>Chapter 4 </h4> <br>
"Christoffer Cristoforetti,4750244426459358,15-07-1980
"
"     Now  at  last  they turned  their faces to  the Mountain  and  set out, "
"     Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they went. he "
"     'This is an  evil door,' said Halbarad, 'and my death lies beyond it. I "
"Whittaker Bruyns,4041595359857382,07-03-1989
"
     Thjoden rose and put his  hand to his  side;  but no sword hung at  his 
and plunged into the forest together.  
"before they fall, look for Bilbo in  the woods of the Shire. I shall be with "
"     'What is that, Legolas? ' he  asked, pointing to the northern sky.  'Is "
swords towards the travellers in token of  peace. Green  gems flashed in the 
to say farewell.' 
"Alison Pestridge,4041374801405,07-08-1980
"
"questions a nd curiosity  about my doings,  I  suppose,' he thought. 'What an "
"stranger,  a visitor on  business from  Michel Delving in the  Westfarthing. "
which she lived lung ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this 
"     In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct line "
"Cherry Barlass,4041591163548,22-04-1978
"
thought he would return to you.' 
"was  fat, and also angry at being  left  till  last. He  refused  to wait  five minutes, and "
     `Here is Nimrodel! ' said  Legolas.  'Of this stream  the Silvan  Elves 
"think of your course now, Aragorn?' "
--' 
"had also always been far to the south of the Lonely Mountain, and would have left "
"     In his time  the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in "
""
"Jamesy Doxey,4041378852575714,15-11-1998
"
Forth 
it.' 
containing  much of  the material that I did not  include  in  the  original 
tale  of a river from the  spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The 
brings us all in peril.' 
     The hobbits felt Grishnbkh's fingers  twitch. 'O ho!' hissed the goblin 
     The  sun climbed to  the noon and then rode slowly  down the sky. Light 
like the glint  of  water on dewy grass  flashed from under her  feet as she 
"for my own satisfaction,  and  I had little hope that other people would  be "
"beside  him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He  turned, and there "
had  bent a  little northward and  the stretch that they had passed over was 
"'rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many years ago in the "
"have no songs  fit for  great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom  sing of "
"demanded of them was  that they should keep the Great Bridge in  repair, and "
"to  be  rude  to  an  eagle, when  you  are  only  the  size  of  a  hobbit,  and  are  up  in  his "
"that had done such  deeds, the  phial blazed forth suddenly, so that all the "
"been hewn,  but now they were  cracked  and worn, and split by the  roots of "
"""But you never guessed my last question, and you promised,"" said Bilbo. "
"mutton off the spite, purloined the beer, and walked off without their noticing him. "
"laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived me and my spell. "
All hope left him. 
"and of how they had all been brought to the Carrock, the sun had fallen behind the "
 
you!' 
singing  here  and  there  outside.  The  room  looked   westward  over  the 
"going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they  would not let "
"into a corner  and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before "
"didn't give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and more than "
down into the valley 
"tell you. You heard the bell.  He's got past the Watchers, and that's tark's "
sky. 
Nob!' 
"over  the  plain Jowyn saw the glitter of their spears, as she stood  still, "
"he said it, he had a feeling  that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide "
"""Well,  no.  They  don't  seem  all  to  have  come  when  I  whistled.  Shy,  I  expect. "
There were  black  squirrels  in  the wood. As  Bilbo's  sharp  inquisitive  eyes  got 
"dwarves' hobbit? What are you doing? How did you get so far past our sentinels?"" "
The  mother  of  our  particular  hobbit  …  what  is  a  hobbit?  I  suppose  hobbits 
"truth-speakers, we men  of Gondor. We boast seldom, and then perform, or die "
"     'Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?' "
""
"their feet, they warmed  their hands gladly at the  blaze. There they stood,  "
me 
"can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of."" "
"Zsazsa Pledge,4041594394659465,27-06-1982
"
"Barb Meader,4041372439166,04-10-2000
"
Chapter 4. A Short Cut to Mushrooms 
the swords  and  spears of the Riders and their  faces to  the  valley. They 
And then suddenly he nodded and went to sleep for a little; and when he woke 
"creeping, creeping.' "
"spoken,' said Aragorn. 'And he does  not use white. The  Orcs in the service "
beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the 
clearing  than all  the  lights went out as  if by magic. Somebody kicked the fire and 
"from  the  mountain-side.  Far  away  came a  hoom-hom, as of  horns blowing "
"Orcs. They kept  no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; yet their speed "
Say just that!' Then he struggled to get up and escape but Gandalf held  him 
"the den of night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinner, and the last  "
"as they stood they saw all the Nazgyl gathered together, hovering  above the "
"Haldir lead us all on a string, like  many blind beggars with one dog? But I "
"Alvy Kehoe,4041379769715732,04-04-1986
"
say. It beats me why any Baggins  of  Hobbiton should go looking for a  wife 
sworn to the  service of the  Lord and of the City. Welcome! He held out his 
"thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo's stories and "
"heads clearer; but now their limbs were deadly tired, as  if they had walked "
"     'Then  stop gaping  at  me  through the  bars, and open the gate!' said "
"but  gave it back to Faramir, and  said: 'By the labour and valour of many I "
grass  with his sword  beneath  him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and 
     LORD OF THE RINGS 
"Darell Chess,4017955259234407,07-07-1985
"
managed to whisper together for a while. 
     'Helm!  Helm!' the Riders  shouted.  'Helm is arisen  and comes back to 
"     'Then, said Glorfindel, 'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the "
you may sit on the table.'  Picking  up the hobbits he set them on the great 
"     Suddenly  he  slopped.  There was an answer, or  so  he  thought; but it "
"Isidro Lougheed,4017952900058,04-06-1984
"
"far, and folk lock up  early. We have to keep watchers all round  the  fence "
"didn't  touch him-no  good interfering with Her. Nar  -- this  little filth, "
"another. The grey figure of the Man, Aragorn son of Arathorn,  was tall, and "
"     'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard; 'and I hope that it may be "
"Terry Weekley,4041592825596884,04-08-1989
"
"     `There's only stars, as I thought,'  he said. Then he gave a  low gasp, "
called once more in a clear voice: 
said. 'Indeed  sooner would I bear a  horse than be borne by one. I  love my 
"him still, if the wolves do not  find us. How  I  hate  this foul pool! ' He "
"Chalmers Winslade,4570811027421660,29-09-1982
"
him at first.' 
"also of better folk. And not many  will remember us, for not many escaped us "
of the first Men that ever wandered  into the West of the  middle-world. Few 
"It was like being  stabbed with knives. I struggled.  But  he sa id: ""Wait  a  "
"creatures live here at  all times, especially birds. Yet now all  things but "
the clock on his mantelpiece in May! 
"hobbit or two in their care -- to teach them the meaning of the word, and to "
"""Nonsense, the one with the grey stockings,"" said a voice like William's. "
Some of the songs were old ones; but some of them were quite new and spoke 
"     Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling, "
"blow to the world, if  the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all  your kind, "
"sigh, and mutter: 'When will Faramir return?' "
"Precious. But master is going to take it to Him, straight to the Black Hand, "
"clear weather, and they looked seldom at it, for it was ominous and dreary even in "
issued  from  a crack in a wall; and there  lay the uplands  of a great vale 
"should cut the say short, if I was you.' "
     Then out of the blackness in his mind he thought that he heard Dernhelm 
Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered 
"own  land,  but not until now in this more sheltered region had the  hobbits "
"     Frodo's tone was  proud, whatever he felt, and Sam approved of it;  but "
"Shadow has departed! I  will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor  vie  with the  "
"Mattie Backwell,4041595224693905,08-12-1997
"
"except  in tales and legends of  long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even  "
"     Now as the blackness of night  returned Frodo sat, his head between his "
"mountain-stone. Darker it loomed, and steadily it rose as  they  approached, "
"hesitation of Bard and his friends, and resolved to strike while they debated. "
"thing  sitting  next  to  him,  and  pawing  and  poking  him.  He  scratched  himself,  he "
"leading  into  a  gloomy  tunnel made  by  two  great  trees  that  leant  together,  too  old "
"went abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change. "
and danced and swirled.  For a moment the water  below him  looked like some 
"     at last he came to Night of Naught, "
"behold!  before  them  stood  the  broad  light  of  day.  In  front  there  rose  a  tall  arch, "
"Raff Bridgewood,4041374870400,01-11-1996
"
""
He  cared  no  longer for Shagrat or Snaga  or any  other orc that  was ever 
"Narsil, none could  withstand.  I beheld the  last  combat  on the slopes of "
he woke: the fire had now sunk to a few embers; the dwarves and Gandalf were all 
"filled with deep suspicion,  and showed it; but  Frodo gave no sign  of what "
     On the further edge of this broad hill-back they stayed their march and  
there?' 
humpbacked downs ahead. The orc-trail grew fainter  as it bent north towards 
"precious, not the nice hobbits. Ashes, ashes, and dust, and thirst there is;  "
despairing effort  to find a way out before  they died of hunger and  thirst. They got 
"striding  up,  roaring  like beasts, a  great company of  hill-trolls out of "
"Lew Noli,4017955593464744,02-09-1991
"
####-tree on the very edge of the wood more prints were discovered. The earth was 
our toil!' he said. 
"cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe. "
"     As  if to his eyes some sudden vision had  been given, Gandalf stirred; "
     To tha t Stone  the Company came and halted in the  dead  of night. Then  
     'Why are  you waiting? What is the  matter with  you?' said Gimli in  a  
"time with goblins in the mountains."" "
"My Moohan,4041593991433,29-05-1998
"
"before all went Aragorn with the Flame of the West, And®ril  like a new fire "
"     'All right, all right!' said  the tracker. 'I'll say  no more and go on "
"     Maggot  jumped  down  and stood holding the  ponies' heads, and peering "
"Marie-ann Balham,4041598786601514,11-11-1982
"
"we  were in  a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was  not,  I  think, "
the  praiseworthy is above all rewards.  Yet  there  was naught  in  this to 
####-whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor. 
""
shut the door. 
straight  way  and  the  open road and with all our  speed. The muster shall 
"motionless among  the slain  leaped  to their feet,  and  came  silently and "
"hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their drinking-bowls seemed "
"surefooted  in  the mountains. The White Rider was upon them, and the terror  "
"riders picking their way; they were coming from the north  side, and already "
hands are bad enough when  empty. And he isn't going to mess  with my pans!' 
They meshed the light of moon and sun. 
inflow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about them as  they lay 
"service of the  Dark Tower when it  first rose again,  and  because  of  his "
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm's Deep. The 
could  look  out  and  see  the  dark  cavernous  opening  in  a  great  cliff-wall between 
the  play of leaves  in the sunshine. Merry  and Pippin  sat  beside him  on 
"inconsistencies that still rema ined in  the text have been corrected, and an "
hundred years of their filth in it.' 
it.  But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and then the  Hobbits took the 
against  them altogether: these -- burbrum' (he again  made a deep rumble of 
begun; and it is your  task to order its beginning  and to preserve what may 
"loathsome.  The water flowing  beneath was  silent, and  it steamed, but the "
by  his hair again. Several Orcs  laughed. Ugl®k thrust a  flask between his 
Dead. Come with me who will!' 
"""Wrong,"" said Bilbo, who had luckily just taken his hand "
spared the ordeal  for  the present. He  was not commanded  to sing. Denethor 
"     ' ""Baggins has  left,""  he answered in a whisper. ""He is coming. He  is "
the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back. 
"Dominique Candelin,4041595225467,27-05-1994
"
"the Wild Man.  'But if you live after the Darkness, then leave Wild Men alone "
     `What is it? ' said Frodo. 
them 
"Dominick McGlynn,4457178444326171,16-03-1983
"
"     'And why should such songs be unfit for my halls, or for such  hours as "
"     The Brandybucks were blowing  the Horn-call of  Buckland,  that had not "
"to be  arrested and taken to Bywater, not direct to the Lockholes. The Chief "
     He went quickly  down the path and came back to the lawn where  Boromir 
"upon it growing in the woods: ""kingsfoil"" I said, "" 'tis a strange name, and "
"     'After that I kept my  eyes open.  In fact, I confess that I spied. But "
"Lenka Colerick,4041379858053,18-11-1981
"
"great net and strategy. This is no longer a  bickering at the fords, raiding "
he spoke of it yet to no one. 
down their passengers. 
"flat  in the  grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo  described the rider and "
"mouths from the Forest of  Fangorn  in the west. About that stream, on  this "
their hearts as a long-lost cousin. 
"lower  door,  and  helter-skelter  down  here.  And  here  we  are-without  the  burglar, "
at the end of your song. For that little prank ------' 
"Riders.' He paused,  and his  eyes were cold and hard. 'And there  are  some "
appeared that a lot of Pippin's  bath had imitated a fountain and leaped  on 
"     `True!' said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. `But where the "
"as  if  something  that grew  in the  ground-asleep, you might say, or  just  "
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed 
""
"Maritsa Boni,4017955969304433,16-05-1994
"
will not come to the Brandywine Bridge before the gates are locked.' 
Gandalf 
tunnel or something to go through? ' 
 
"would  not have been annihilated  but enslaved, and Barad-dyr would not have "
"others restrained  themselves and did not stare at him,  the eyes of Boromir "
with his arm. 
"     'Bring news,' said  the Wild Man. 'We look out from hills. We climb big "
"Mordor,  or  so it is said; but they are  not  yet under the  yoke.  But  if "
"about. Though I  say it as shouldn't, you may  think,'  he  added with a wry "
"cold  but  better  than  the water,  and  he  hoped  he would  not  suddenly  roll off again "
swords!' 
""
The next morning Bilbo woke up with the early sun in his eyes. He jumped up 
"brought you about  seventy  thousand  ent-strides, but what that comes to in "
east.'  He  sighed as he looked a t  the gloomy ridges across the  valley. 'I  
"music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more. "
"     'I will, lord,' said Faramir. 'For who would lie idle when the king has "
"like a vice; slowly and relentlessly he bent the hand down and forward, till "
"Girion! Alas that he is lost!"" "
dwindled to mere ba nks. It began  to wind and wander. That night drew to its 
"arch, and then he  drained his bowl at one draught, one long, slow  draught. "
"`Sneaking,  sneaking!'  he  hissed.  'Hobbits always  so polite, yes. O nice "
"Necromancer."" "
"     'They will  make it yet. They will escape,' thought Pippin. And then he "
"Shep Perren,4041376377271,04-01-1991
"
"that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and "
"Rayshell Jefferson,4600394504578,22-06-1999
"
"to us?'  said Aragorn. 'The morning passes, and we have an errand  that will "
"####-servants. Gollum, in any case, would not move under  the  Yellow. Face. Soon "
"Noel Phelipeaux,4017952610111,27-08-1977
"
"Aridatha Crutchley,4017955882469,21-02-1995
"
that he was in peril. But  he escaped in the end.  I am glad. It was  not in 
"into a further hall.  In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in "
"Denni Dunbabin,4041592205538,14-03-2000
"
"broken, and  some cracked  as foot was set  upon them. The hobbits struggled "
"like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still "
"Ernie Crichmer,4017957128755836,18-07-1983
"
"since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass underfoot, wet "
"corridor to the  door of the Tower Hall. There Denethor sat in a grey gloom,  "
"northward was, maybe, the way that their hunters would least expect them  to "
earth? War is at hand.' 
 
"     'Deep  is the abyss  that is spanned by Durin's  Bridge, and  none  has "
"As  you  see,  the Master  had  not  got  his  position  for  nothing.  The  result  of  his "
"     `Yes, they are Elves,'  said Legolas; `and they say that you breathe so "
in the walls.  There  were  many of  these. In the  pale ray of the wizard's 
"Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end to  end. But, of course,  it was "
will treat you better.' 
Suddenly they were aware  that  everything wa s very quiet; the  whole forest  
"Bevan Silmon,4017958105090,29-11-1985
"
"     `Tales  out  of  the South,' Gollum went on again, `about  the tall Men "
"little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of "
"Treebeard  won't say much about them,  but  I think they are Ents that  have "
"     'You  will  find them  in  the Houses of Healing, and  I will  lead you  "
"     `I will answer for him,' said Frodo. `He brought  me to the Black Gate, "
"found it, and Gollum would  have killed  me, if I hadn't kept it. I'm not  a  "
"Lazar Bene,4017958070776374,07-12-1994
"
deal with him. Go on!' 
"now. I could not give it up, and if you tried to take it I should go mad.' "
decrepitude of  the once  thriving  corn-mill beside its  pool that long ago 
"Curtis Sedge,4017954609640,22-10-1987
"
"     `I know little of Iarwain save the name,' said Galdor; `but Glorfindel, "
"     He stood up,  and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a  "
"Reeba Klassman,4500650527639974,17-06-2000
"
"     'Quietly, Sam! ' said Frodo. `He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear "
"and  safe,  but  I  warn  you  all  not  to  forget what  Beorn  said  before  he  left  us:  you "
"gongs, a hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold. "
"liar,  and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the  Ring his "
caught a Warg and a goblin wandering in the woods. From these he had got news: 
among  the  trees. But  they  don't  like  the  sun:  it makes  their  legs wobble  and  their 
it.' He  ran to the ponies and before  long  came back with two tinder -boxes 
"Lannie Tinker,4017959335449,05-06-1988
"
followed. Aragorn looked back  as they  passed towards the gate. Alone Jowyn 
"could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road  to the Fire by the  power "
####-     'Green are those  fields in the songs of my people; but  they were dark 
and he  feared that the Dark Lord  had not been idle while  they lingered in 
the Elves  of  Nimrodel's kindred left their dwellings and departed  and she 
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?' 
"For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him.' "
"never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and  lonely. Now the time "
who  had  as children been fond of  Bilbo  and often in and out of Bag  End.  
"Latisha McCrostie,4969553168685,04-12-1983
"
"Damara Josefsson,4041371895400,16-11-1999
"
"sword  rang, glanced  aside, and  fell  from his shaken  hand. The blade was "
"into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.' "
"himself, he  is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now "
"and a loud voice was heard shouting: 'Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!' "
"night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for  "
"Brenda Ortells,4041591539320177,07-09-1998
"
frightened. We ought to try and rescue him.' 
Gondor; or  have  you not  heard the strange tidings that  have come to  the 
"every corner of it. Orcs have always behaved like that, or so all tales say, "
""
"Valentijn Bezarra,4803007351237553,07-08-1977
"
"Rebeca Dixcey,4041374522977,27-04-1981
"
"behind  his head, staring  out of his hood at the empty sky.  At least for a  "
""
times  of waking  Sam  was busy  with thoughts  of food. At  last when Frodo 
"the  twilight. The  last green had  almost  faded out of  the grass, when  they  came  at "
"hobbits, but they all agreed they were  marvellous crackers.  They contained "
"Nonna Luebbert,4041376426090715,20-01-1993
"
     Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?  
"Orbadiah Cowthart,4017951409796,04-08-2000
"
"     Indeed Gollum  had suddenly paused again,  and his  large  head on  its "
"     Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if  the whole dark world "
"     And  then black despair came down  on him, and Sam bowed to the ground, "
     Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.  
"""Then all the more reason for taking us to him,"" burst in Fili, who was getting "
under cover  of  this love he will think it easier to  learn what he witches 
"that history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond  himself  set it down in "
"grey now in the falling night,  lay all about, but  in front on the far side "
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.' 
     Neither  he nor Frodo knew  anything of  the great slave-worked  fields 
"     `I  will not go,' said Boromir;  'not  unless  the vote  of  the  whole "
us leave this  -- did you say what you call it?' 
tarried there. And yestereve a  new  moon came again.  Winter is nearly gone. 
     And still  Meriadoc  the hobbit stood there blinking through  his tears 
"could see  him now  by the parapet, panting,  his  left claw  clenching  and "
"""Hail Thorin!"" said Bard. ""Are you still of the same mind?"" "
     They followed  him  as  he stepped lightly up  the  grass-clad  slopes.  
"Launce Busek,4017959858545940,07-07-1980
"
living images.  The world  seemed to have shrunk  and  fallen silent. He was 
"take my  advice you will use it very  seldom, or not at  all. At least I beg "
"you know, I thought for a  bit that I had lost my sight? From  the lightning "
"     'Thank you!' said Merry. 'In that case I will have my pouch back, which "
indeed was  the commotion among all  things with wings  that dwelt on  the borders 
you are fat and lazy.  
Aragorn who  bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in 
"just squeal  and bolt,  and  there  are  more than  enough of  these  filthy "
to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.' 
""
walked quickly back to Bag End. 
"Arlan MacBain,4041590429999,04-12-1995
"
"And wealth that they cherish, "
"strange  lightening  of  the  heart,  as  if  a  heavy  weight  had  gone  from  under  his "
"when they fell. As I read it, they found the enemy already on the  out-wall, "
loud sigh and gave a huge yawn. 
and yet upon no head visible was it set. The red fires  shone between it and 
their hearts was stilled. Time halted. 
"     'Forty-two,  Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My  axe is  notched: the "
 
"     They drew up their boats on the green banks, and  beside them they made  "
"They came to the West -gate and found it shut, but  at the door  of the lodge "
"Chuck Ferreira,4476914979297,08-02-1981
"
"Bethena Bardnam,4041376655505730,15-02-2001
"
"became, by no wish of  their  own, both important and renowned, and troubled "
"said. 'No, my  heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and "
"Dyane Scotchmore,4017958119952044,17-02-1984
"
"     'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Jomer. "
or two of being caught and strangled when he slipped in through the door. 
"readers have raised. I have considered all their comments and enquiries, and "
"put on the Ring and claim it for his own, and all this could be. "
able  down  the  gentle  slopes  of  a  pine  forest  in  a  slanting  path  leading  steadily 
moving on the ground a mile below even in the moonlight. So though he could not 
     Arrows  fell  among them. One  struck Frodo  and  sprang  back. Another  
"     'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,' said Ingold.  'But what "
"Seeing-stones of N®menor, farewell! ' "
"serpent?' said Saruman,  and the  flash of  his  anger was now plain to see. "
     `Gollum!'  he  called softly. `Third  time pays  for all. I  want  some 
Old Tomnoddy can't spy me! 
was walking all night.' 
"####-Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in "
or something better.' 
"shapes of the Orcs in front grew dim, and then were swallowed up. "
which  the  stream  went  towards  Dale.  Approach  to  the  Gate  was  now  only 
     Until the stars are all alight. 
"been  planted.  Especially  there  was  clover,  waving  patches  of  cockscomb  clover, "
"honour. Frodo could see him  now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper  "
"####-the  burden  that  is laid on me. Against -well,  if it must be said, against  "
"live about here, tame to the hands of my father and grandfather. They were a long-"
     Chapter 6   The King of the Golden Hall   
"did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!' "
then sat down and quietly ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show 
be here and stand beside you and earn  perhaps the arms that you have  given 
"treasure."" "
"withered grass amidst a land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of "
With  that he carried all  the gear away to  one of the many gaping fissures 
"looking  up at  the  sun and  sky with steady eyes,  and singing  softly  to "
"     'That sounds  well,' sneered Saruman.  'Very  much  in  the  manner  of "
     `Sssh! ssh! ' hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. `Sssh! ' His fingers 
"Sandro Hansell,4823307952986384,29-04-1990
"
"warned  them. But they  were  alone, and Aragorn was  far away, and  Gandalf "
The king is come unto his hall 
idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had just begun  to sneak off 
     They rolled the Man slowly up the hill 
"     'All the same,' said Frodo to all those who stood near, 'I wish for  no "
"     'Thank you!' said the hobbits, one after the other. "
"     'The Cross-roads, yes,' whispered Gollum, the first words that had been "
and all later dates were reckoned from it.2 At once the western Hobbits fell 
"dragons, and a  fiery mountain, and - and  Elves, sir. I listened because  I "
"again, and bore him towards the door. But as he did  so  Faramir moaned  and "
"     'Noon?' said Sam, trying to calculate. 'Noon of what day? ' "
them were small lodges for the gatekeepers.  
"the  streams,  there was a hythe of white stones and  white wood. By it were "
"Marlowe Danielli,4041378913907492,07-12-1994
"
"gate and not linger any more. With a shrug of his shoulders,  as if to shake "
"     'Come, Master Perian!' said the lad. 'You are still  in pain, I see.  I "
hoping in its shadow to escape the attention of the Eye. 
"Celisse Bulger,4926579297682177,01-10-1977
"
"     'Well, good luck on your road,  and good luck to your home-coming! said "
"slimy, shaggy growths.  "
"fires  had  been.  Whether  it  was  one  of  those  they  had  seen  the  night  before,  they "
"down  the  valley  and  up  the  newly  found  path,  and  so  to  the  narrow  ledge. Along "
was. 
"went down the mist  became colder  and damper, and their hair hung lank  and "
""
and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!' 
"then we've not come back too  soon.' He sprang from his pony, and seeing the "
""
"hobbit-care, he went down to the water -course, and then followed it for some "
"Dame Nanson,4041595389672611,04-07-1992
"
"Baggins?"" "
"son  in  a  coat  of  dwarf-linked rings the like of which had never been made before, "
above the shadows of death was coming with the dawn. 
"until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.' "
"their  left  northward, back  towards the hills. and so barred their road in "
"Mountain;  yet  Thrain  was  the  son  of  Thror,  the  last  King  under  the  Mountain "
saw 
"these black  fellows come after you  again,  I'll  deal with  them. I'll say "
Later on you might have seen a bright fire on  the shelf of rock and  the figures 
and stream that  ran suddenly  beneath their  spreading  boughs. In  the dim 
"course,'  said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.  "
"downwards, stiff, his hands clenched. "
said.  'In  a  little while I shall take  the  road.  I release you from  my 
     sank into silence: so the songs tell us. 
"""Wait! Wait!""  it  said  to  him.  ""The moon  is  rising.  Look  for  the  hollow  of  the "
"what  can  I do, if I do  keep  awake, me all alone, and all these great Men "
"Trixi Gittus,4041598061646,24-08-1982
"
"ain't no eaves at Bag End, and that's a fact.' "
"sharp stone to sharpen his fangs on, and other nasty things. He tried to think what "
and away westward  towards the river that  flowed out of the forest. In that 
"way.  I've never been so far myself; they're  queer folks in Buckland. No, I "
`and  he  has the favour of  the  Lady. All then is  well.  But you have yet 
and looked down at him and was amazed. 
"creatures, as I have said before. You  can learn all that there  is  to know "
"was  growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his back.  To take "
"     'There's another stair still,' he said. `Much  longer stair. Rest  when "
to weep and bite at his ankle again. 
deadly  was  the  wrath  of  the  hands  that  held  them.  As  soon  as  the  host  of  their 
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put  the thing on? He didn't ought to have; 
"bit.  Bilbo  did  his  best.  He  caught  hold  of  Tom's  leg-as  well  as  he  could,  it  was "
deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer  
splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.  
voice murmured: 
""
"afterwards  occupied, came for the most  part  later into the Shire  up from "
"on a fine morning,  but I like to be in  bed while it's falling. I wish this "
"Lucias Haversum,4017958163534763,01-08-1989
"
"and driven  into  a hole and  then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good "
"seven days yet , or so I was bidden. I beg you to go back.' "
revenge!  
"steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and the "
was no longer there. 
"The pines were roaring on the height, "
     Frodo was lying face upward  on the ground and the monster  was bending 
"Alessandro Spottswood,4496220101519,02-02-1990
"
"It's near  sundown  already,  and we are going to  have our  supper; for  we "
"moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize  him by the ankle, "
"Susannah Boraston,4041370391724,19-05-1982
"
"     But  Celeborn  said: 'Kinsman,  farewell! May  your doom be  other than "
"Tome Loughlan,4620428834996659,01-02-1987
"
"Sam's  ear. Sam burst into tears, and  fumbled with the straps, unlading all "
report and the  rumour of bygone  days. But there  is some  dark terror that 
brought them to the hill reappeared on  the northward side; but they had not  
"Bale Laba,4041592912265,07-03-1978
"
"     Mordor -dark  had returned, and the watch-fires on  the  heights  burned "
"Adelind Apark,4017952994462252,18-05-1997
"
"     Stroke  after  stroke he dealt, until at last  all the  web within  his "
"side. Both Sam and Gollum ran after him. Sam caught his  master in his arms,  "
stunned men's ears.  And thereupon the  middle  door  of the Black Gate  was 
"     Fighting off both the sickness and  the fear, Frodo gripped Sam's hand. "
came and sat beside the hobbits. 
"Danya Dinesen,4017952977064,18-01-1979
"
southward along the western skirts of the downs. After him they rode: a long 
"southwards, and northwards the saw-toothed mass of  Irensaga, between  which "
"     There were four goblin-soldiers of greater  stature, swart, slant-eyed, "
"     Pippin was recovering. He  was warm, but the wind in his  face was keen "
"to  send  you  on  this  adventure.  Very  amusing  for  me,  very  good  for  you  and "
"and slippery. When they got to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw that the "
swords. 
had been set to the fuel. Then Gandalf revealed the strength that lay hid in 
"Leese Fitch,4041377216122,06-12-1980
"
At the Mountain -king's return! 
"last?' Strider nodded, but did not answer.  'Morning, my little friends!' he "
"     `Do you now  wish to look , Frodo? '  said  the Lady Galadriel. `You did "
growing  bright  and  tall;  but  a  pony  that  walked  there  with  a  pack  on  its  back 
they  had  seen  neither  spring  nor  stream.  This  was  their  state  when  one  day  they 
"     'Oh, that!' said Pippin. 'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.' "
"guttural,  yet to Merry's  surprise he spoke  the Common Speech, though in a "
"     'This  is poor fare,' they said  to the hobbits; 'for we are lodging in "
"Davie Leyfield,4195769366488283,03-12-1993
"
want a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with 
"would  not tell. When  night came it  did  but deepen  the darkness, and our "
"far  away, leaping  blindly up  the path to the hill -top. Terror  and  grief "
"####-They made  their  first  camp  on  the western  side  of  the  great  southern  spur, which "
"     'I  suppose so,'  said  Frodo.  'I'm tired.  and  I don't  think I  can "
trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet going the other  
"doors,  or  popped over walls and fences,  as they passed. But as they  drew "
"####-Up they all jumped. There, sure enough, not far away were scores of twinkling "
distressed tha t he turned  back;  but at  that  moment  a  clear  call  came 
"####-kindled, Narsil  re-forged  as deadly as of old: and upon his  brow  was the "
     'Thank  you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your 
     Chapter 3   The Uruk-Hai  
others. He called to Balin and told him what he thought of a look-out man who let 
     'That must be my hope'' said Legolas. 'But I wish that he had come this 
"He ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face. He felt that even "
"     'I'm sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders.' "
"But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off  without a  "
"Gertie Steventon,4041373653333579,30-12-1996
"
     At  last Tom  and Goldberry rose and  cleared  the  table  swiftly. The 
"the arts of the Enemy, for  good  or  for ill. But such falls and betrayals,  "
like  any  kind  of  owl  any  more  than  fly  like  a  bat.  But  at  any  rate  hobbits  can 
"unable to  discover the catch  or bolt that held it,  he scrambled  over  as "
"Veronike Jenney,4041374194618007,08-03-1991
"
"Francklyn McGinty,4041379154792,28-05-1990
"
"     He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had become "
"Benedetta Simeons,4733511020896421,10-02-1984
"
"Stay and be comforted!'  Then taking two leaves,  he  laid them on his hands "
"Danica Guise,4041595743683,13-09-1997
"
"yellow leaves of  the mallorn, and  it  seemed to the hobbits that the early "
Fangorn.' 
""
master  him against the will  of Gandalf.  He turned and looked at his great 
"River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the east, "
####- 
opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward. 
"     Haldir led  Frodo  before them, and the  Lord welcomed  him in his  own "
"can be made  out for certain. All  our  footprints  are  here, crossing  and "
"occasional ""Bilbo!"" thrown in). But the cries of the others got steadily further and "
"said nothing, and waited. "
"Gilli Bunn,4598239032678538,01-12-2000
"
"far  as the eye could pierce, even to the  distant  menace of the mountains,  "
"will. As Sam stood there, even though the Ring was not on  him but hanging by "
the Lord of  this realm maintained  and  fed his  slaves and his armies. Yet 
"passages: all  led  in  the  same  general  direction,  eastwards;  but  the "
"     Merry  smiled. 'Well then,' he said, 'if  Strider will  provide what is "
     Vividly before Frodo's  mind came the memory  of Boromir's assault upon 
but I soon shan't be.' 
     And Jowyn  said to Faramir: 'Now I must go back to my own land and look  
"Dot Smeed,4017950617407,18-07-1976
"
"sign; but stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call that "
"####-     'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,' said Beregond, 'that to us "
largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round him. 
""
hooked barbs that rent like knives. The sullen shrivelled leaves of  a  past  
"Thjodred your son was slain upon  the West  Marches: your right hand, Second "
"prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand "
"standing on the  grass  in  Lurien,  and gifts  were  in her hands. And you, "
"master's empty  bed  and  leapt to his feet. Then  he saw  two dark figures, "
racing towards the Barrow-downs like a wind from the North. 
"""We  guesses,  precious,  only  guesses.  We  can't  know  till  we  find  the  nassty "
"     'Well, I  suppose  we  must be going on  again,' he said. 'I wonder how "
     'You don't  need to  tell me  that! ' said Sam. `I came without any and 
"Tommi Piotrowski,4017955773908,19-06-1975
"
"     His voice laid on her: Beren came, "
some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs laughed with loud voices; 
"road, but they  kept  it  on their left, following its line as  well as they "
"####-gentle arms,  closing his eyes, like  a child at rest  when night-fears  are "
"     At the last  before the guests set oat Jomer and  Jowyn came to  Merry, "
"     There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter, "
"mighty men. Then suddenly  as they  drew near and he could see them plainly, "
power  as it approached the places of its forging; but one  thing it did not 
"good, Gandalf. It's been uncommon good, since you came in the autumn of last  "
"part,  though there wer e a  few guests of other  sorts.  Elrond, as  was his "
"you resting, I hope, after your long labours.' "
"Ardys Nilges,4041591989017,22-12-1989
"
word.  Bag End began to be busy.  Some of Frodo's friends  came  to stay and 
     'Will you not take the sword?' said Gandalf.  
     The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled. 
"Off  Bilbo  scuttled  to  a  fresh  place,  but  several  of  the  spiders  had  run  now  to "
Leaving  the  road  they  went into  the deep resin -scented  darkness of the 
"Shire  for  sixty   years,  ever  since  his  remarkable  disappearance  and "
into  profound  wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled  Cracks of Doom 
""
"     'What  is that?' said Gandalf, opening his  eyes. 'Yes,  I think I  can "
Marshal  who commanded  the  jored in which they were riding. He and all  his 
day's end.  He wondered where  in all this strange world  Pippin had got to; 
worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought you to see-though as for 
"into your  own.  Never  again  shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only "
"and fighting began. The two big  brutes:  they quarrelled, I think. Over  me "
"up to the Walls of  Moria, and the Sirannon flowed  through it with the road "
"     'Not  too safe, I should say,' said  Merry.  'But  I have  only had one "
"""I  will  not  say  if  this  counsel  be  good  or  bad,""  croaked  Róac;  ""but  I will  do "
"will sleep now,' he said; and the  Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and "
"Travers Shackleton,4041590564145210,18-02-1994
"
"silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be stifling under  "
 
lot of Tom-fools.' 
"felt Sam looking at him, as if  he knew  that  his  master was in some great "
bet.  Anyhow old Stinker  is so frightened  of the Enemy  --  and  he's under 
     `But  that will leave  no place for  us!'  cried Pippin in  dismay. `We 
"####-     Gandalf smiled. `I have heard all about  Sam,' he said. 'He has no more "
"cloud, but it was ringed all about with a sickly yellow glare. "
"     Gimli bowed.  'I am proud, Lord  of the Mark, to bear your  device,' he "
follies. Many became enamoured of the Darkness and the black arts; some 
not yet at any rate. He sheathed his sword. 
"     `Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The Lady "
"see. There is work for  the  Sword to do.  Yes, and we could find a  use for "
coming up the Greenway from the south.' 
"     Frodo  yawned and stretched.  'You  should  have been  resting Sam,' he "
     Seven stars and seven stones 
gnarled and branched;  and all the stems were green  or grey with  moss  and  
"losing  himself,  until  a  chance  came  of  returning. He was  hungry  too  outside,  for "
round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand seemed only just to have slipped off  
"Mablung, 'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this "
of the ponies. He found that  two had wandered on a good way along the path; 
"Sephira Lilley,4152468336763047,18-06-1975
"
"Riders  were  drawing  in  their  ring  close  round the  knoll, risking the "
boots. These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then  he  sat in the 
was William's. 
"pipe-weed (but not near enough,  I'll  warrant); flint  and tinder;  woollen "
"Ring, a  burden on  the  body and a torment  to his  mind. Anxiously Sam had "
"for a while; but  resistance became unbearable, and at  last he  slowly drew "
     over dead sea and withered land. 
away. 
permanent trail even for Rangers  to find through their shifting  quagmires.  
Dead.' 
"about  visits to the orchard. There was some  murmuring, but also some grins "
"the  tumult  and  the  burning,  Bilbo  swinging  in  the  air  with  his  arms  nearly "
"Jeffrey Loftus,4041599186723,12-09-1989
"
"Candra Carine,4017959976671,15-07-1983
"
"     'Well,  I hope they  get  him and  put him  through  it,'  growled  the "
"took out the elven-cloak. 'How's  this, Mr.  Frodo?' he said. 'You wrap that "
"ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the  end it  would utterly "
"Cris Summerson,4269821056634,24-02-1995
"
"near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening "
"Woody End.  They don't live in the Shire, but they  wander into it in Spring "
"and jewels, but he would not change his mind. "
"the  sweet  and the bitter. But in  my stead you shall go, Ring-bearer, when "
No  trees grew there; but among  the rank  grasses  could still be  seen the 
"aside. He  was not daunted by  the distance, I am  sure.  No, something else "
N®menor. Good n ight!' 
"is ever a danger to the hand.  Saruman also had a mind to capture  the Ring, "
"getting  rid  of  Smaug  –  which  had  always  been  a  weak  point  in  their  plans,  as "
"he asked  to gain  time, until he could  think of a really hard one. This he  thought a "
"Nessa Domenicone,4342002026740,14-09-1983
"
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill -tops.' 
the errand-riders of their  lord. And they said: 'Surely that is one  of the 
"out in exchange for the Arkenstone: for he did not believe that this would be done, "
""
"     Gollum's  eyes  glinted. `He  doesn't  know  what  we  minds,  does  he "
"     They walked on in  silence for a  while,  passing  like grey and  green "
"     `Of course,  my dear Bilbo,' said Gandalf. `If  you had  really started "
"they worshipped him, being enamoured  of evil knowledge.  And he entered the "
"years ago last Thursday, and has never been seen by you since—"" "
made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent. He was just stooping  
his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down 
should  I  wish  to  leave?  And  what  do you  mean  by  'free'?  There are 
"here. The  Road  is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried  to "
""
asked. 
On  the eastern bank to their left  they saw long formless slopes stretching 
"but of the line of Isildur. I will not bow to such a  one, last of  a ragged "
"higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press of roaring  men leaped forth.  "
"and clear  sun had seemed but a mockery to men whose days  held  little hope, "
of my own la nd before. And if I had known what the world outside was like. I 
"easier going  than he  expected. This was no goblin  entrance, or  rough wood-elves' "
drawing  near  the  end  of  the  eastward  journey  and  coming  to  the  last  and  greatest 
his mouth.  'But they say also that  you need have  no fear. They have  been 
all.  Smjagol won't  grub for roots and  carrotses  and  --  taters.  What's 
"     Sam  sighed. 'That's just as I feared,' he said. 'Well,  to say nothing "
"pipe.  And  here's another: an unused one. I have carried  it  a  long way,, "
"     Actually Gandalf was awake, though  lying still and silent. He was deep "
"The  sword  went  back  into  its  sheath.  ""Follow  me  quick!""  said  a  voice  fierce "
"""I  believe  he  is  trying  to  tell  us  something,""  said  Balin;  ""but  I  cannot  follow "
"Dougy Copland,4041596140210,17-07-2000
"
     It was after nightfall when they had  entered the  Mines. They had been 
"Kristine Gilardi,4041590490957944,15-04-1998
"
     'Enough to  perceive  that there are two follies to avoid. To  use this 
spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour  of their 
"make a guess at Halflings! Though,' and  now he  smiled, `there is something "
prisoner. 
"doing anything risky in the  dim again, Mr.  Frodo! And I  haven't  got over "
"remains  a  standing  pool,  or  you  discover  the outlets.  When  all  the "
"sudden and terrible, from the  tower above, the sound  of the great horn  of "
""
"became dark and silent, though the  clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the  "
not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find 
host left Morgul Vale and  took the northward road beneath the shadow of the 
what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.' 
"stream  leaping  down to the trough of the  valley, and then  running on and "
"     'So that was the job I felt I had to  do when  I started,' thought Sam: "
"     He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed  low. This "
Aragorn; 'for  it  was there that he and Gandalf  parted. But  alas! Gandalf 
Ya-harri-heyl 
     Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this time 
Gandalf. 
learn how to wield the  full  power all in a day. Indeed it can be used only 
     O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water! 
"like an island in the empty  lands round about. Besides  Bree  itself, there "
"Lazaro Tuffin,4041599824901,13-07-1990
"
"But  Gandalf  made no sign;  and drawn forward once more, half  against  his "
"     So passed the sword  of the Barrow-downs, work of Westernesse. But glad "
"then in the dawn he had  seen a pale gleam of gold, and they had come to the "
malice was in them that men stepped  back from  him. He bared his teeth; and 
"history!  These  must  be the  very  three  that  were  caught  by  Gandalf,  "
"for  a  long while. Thorin  at  length broke  the  silence,  and his voice was  thick with "
"clever brown fingers, good-natured faces, and laugh deep fruity laughs (especially "
white crest of Jomer led the great front of  the Rohirrim which he had again 
any weapon that could  hurt me. Be merry! We meet  again. At the turn of the 
"     `But we were  too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron  also had watched us,  "
"those bloody-handed  Elves, or one of the filthy tarks.1 He's coming here, I "
Baggins    began    the   pr eparations   for   the   celebration   of    his 
 
River Running. The moon was  shining  in  a  broad  silver  crescent. He  held  up  the 
am not coming to the Shire. You must  settle its affairs yourselves; that is 
can't be undone. ' 
"With that one of the fat spiders ran along a rope, till it came to a dozen bundles "
     Frodo finished his  breakfast in silence.  Then standing  up he  looked 
the clear unwavering  eyes of the man of Gondor. There  was a still silence. 
Frodo felt the pain   and also the  sense of  frozen cold lessen in his side; 
"     Then said Elrohir: 'From the North we came with this purpose,  and from "
     The  chanting  ceased. Frodo opened his eyes  and  saw  that Bilbo  was 
hilt.  There  was a shriek and the light vanished. In  the  dark there was a  
Chapter 10. The Black Gate Opens 
"hounds,  if he could. What aid can he give  to you, forsooth? All he desires "
"     'But you cannot  see very far,' said Gandalf. 'Neither can I. It may be "
     They  came at  length  to the steep abrupt  end of Treebeard's Hill and 
"     `We must  take a little food,' said Frodo. `Are you hungry, Smjagol? We "
if you would; and only through darkness shall I come to it.' 
"drawn up. The last of them  were  floating away, just  overhead, as wisps of "
to him that he understood. 
"     First of  all, before  they  had  eaten or  washed  or even shed  their "
"Black Stone I call you! "" And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung back at "
"     'I will come and see them, if  ever I can,' said  Frodo. 'How surprised "
The  evening meal had been  taken  to  the prisoners. The guards were  tramping 
"ferocious  dogs  - but after all, folk down here are near the border and have "
"####-longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and "
"     `That won't do! Never thought  it  would show like that! ' he muttered, "
were best left until  daylight. Don't you think  you  had better finish now?  
over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street. 
was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.' 
"     `That I see,' said Faramir thoughtfully. `Or I see that it might be so. "
and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys. So soon they struggled 
the score right!' 
"Alicia Glasscoe,4041591874466,24-06-1988
"
"or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made  no sign of getting ready to "
getting the better of his mirth. 'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond 
     `Welcome Gimli  son of  Gluin!  It is long indeed since  we  saw one of 
"days on  the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the  postman, hoping for  "
But now I am going to stand  up  and  take  a little sleep.  Where  will you  
"must  be going  on again.  I hope  you companions  have all rested, too, and "
Are  there  still  Ents in the  world? I thought they were  only a memory of 
"Doralin Mularkey,4017956271852,16-02-1996
"
"owed  some  reward.  But  ‘third  time  pays  for  all'  as  my  father  used  to  say,  and "
But  now  they  had  planned with  the  goblins'  help  to  come  by  night  upon  some  of 
"     'It is  less  easy  to find people in the  woods and  fields,' answered "
unless the Great  Sea should enter in and  wash  it with oblivion.  `I  feel 
"Toby Phipard-Shears,4569814839832382,17-07-1977
"
"and  great  furnaces.  Iron  wheels  revolved  there endlessly, and  hammers "
with him. 
green 
"     'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins, "
something else:  like the faint  fall of soft bare feet. It  was  never loud 
     Tin®viel! Tin®viel! 
"vigilance of Lurien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard "
"     'If you  would  understand them better, then I bid  you  come with me,' "
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than  a couple  of hundred 
Dunharrow  beneath  the feet  of  the White  Mountains. There he  found  the 
""
"Kariotta Cicerone,4798263565827,01-02-1975
"
     As  they expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlour after supper to see 
"is  a  scholar in  the  Ancient  Tongue.  Bilbo  was a  good  master.  Hail, "
such bright things as they coveted to hide in their dwellings. 
"roots of the Mountain, the Heart of the Mountain, the Arkenstone of Thrain. "
"first  touched the water,'  said Frodo. 'What  was the  thing, or were there "
"     'Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he  got  a chance  to  whisper  to Mr. "
"""Balin at your service,"" said he. "
Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said 
with the Bearer. 
seized and dragged for some distance. 
"staggered  and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid  into the  abyss. "
     But  it was  no  orc-chieftain or  brigand that led  the  assault  upon 
Mountain;  that  it was Thror's grandson not Thror himself  that had come back did 
of which he seemed to have full knowledge; and at last he stopped and looked 
"sent it, I would guess.' "
in the City.' 
"with  cold dew. Everything was  still,  and far-away  noises seemed near and "
"####-to fall more steeply.  Then they turned aside again, to the right,  and came "
"Cloudyhead: Celebdil  the  White,  and  Fanuidhol  the Grey,  that  we  call "
""
try and  win over  the honest Radagast  to  treachery. He sought me  in good 
and 
"his son remained behind, unable to contain their joy. As he followed Gandalf "
"Eleen Lynnett,4041597533998769,13-11-2001
"
     When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid; 
"him.  Old  grey Willow-man! I'll freeze his  marrow cold, if he don't behave "
"growling, and  they had a business getting  themselves and  their ponies along. Still "
"in  itself,  and  to me  it  is  beyond  price.  That  stone  of  all  the  treasure  I  name  unto "
"Kelly Manchett,4041590275459,24-07-1985
"
"Beregond!' he cried. 'They are  looking for something, surely? See  how they "
"for my brother, whom I too loved!' He rose. 'May I have your leave, father?' "
"Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind  us,  "
"the seeking. And if  I turn back, refusing the road in its bitter end, where "
long arms and  hard claws seized him. he  let it fall. 'There  I  suppose it 
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves  
toes.  He  wished  again  and  again  for  his  nice  bright  hobbit-hole. Not  for  the  last 
"     '  ""To  Gimli son  of  Gluin,"" she  said,  ""give  his   Lady's greeting. "
"Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-gown went into the dining-room. "
"edge of  the  forest, and  round  its northern end  in  the waste  that  lay between  it and "
"     As far as Sam could see, Shagrat  hunted  Snaga round  the roof,  until "
"night they rode, ever  slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed "
     'Since then  the water has  been sinking  again. There  must be outlets 
did not quite like. 
"Ring-bearer,  and  one who has seen  the Eye.  Verily it is in the  land  of "
"     'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.  "
"Conny Rainford,4041372973896836,09-06-1987
"
the  fire was on his face like summer -light upon the trees. Near him sat the 
would ha ve been folly  to try  with all the Nine  at  my heels. So I  had to 
and  the   tobacco  of the Southfarthing  play  a part in  the  history  that 
"glance. ""I remember the Mountain well enough and the lands about it. And I know "
"Mindy Romagnosi,4297216535839,02-01-1990
"
"Wat Boulger,4041592410302,16-09-1984
"
"paths  in  this part of  the world. Remember you are over the Edge of the Wild now, "
""
"vapour that  rose from it, curling and twisting about the bridge, was deadly "
"semicircle,  between the  arms  of which Faramir was  seated  on the ground,  "
"them; but  he was content to  lean on their guidance,  and he spent  as much "
been  whispering  together  a  good  deal  during  the  evening.  Harry  the 
getting up on to the long branch where the bundles were dangling. I don't suppose 
"waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear a sword instead of a walking-stick. He "
"no curse in  Elvish, Entish, or  the  tongues  of Men bad  enough  for  such "
"your service!"" he said with his hand on his breast. "
"it to others,' he added with a look at the stranger and the miller. "
to any save to Elrond. 
"     'I do not know where he is,' said Frodo. 'He is only a chance companion "
"A little  above the hill's foot they halted, and wrapping their cloaks about "
"     'On, lad! On!' he cried. 'We'll be going back soon.' "
event travelled all  over the Shire. The  history and character of Mr. Bilbo 
"Ivette Abbate,4017958833907,21-03-1975
"
"     never thirsting, ever drinking; "
"Harcourt Baukham,4041595047135,25-01-1977
"
it.' 
"Pierette Dannehl,4117651468471398,05-03-1994
"
"behind,  framed in  light. She held a  candle, shielding its flame  from the "
"####-     'So I thought,' said Pippin, 'for you look like your father. I know him "
"Ransom Kibby,4017959358893394,05-09-1999
"
"him,  and he wanders  often far, free upon the  hillsides. When  your ponies "
and the  ruffians can't come at 'em; and they won't let the ruffians come on 
"     'And  there  you'll hear  later all  that  we say,  and  more,' laughed "
rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel. 
     Thjoden at once called a halt. The Riders turned about and seized their 
"     `You were wrong,'  said Gandalf. 'You  were  inattentive. I had already "
""
"lower  and  lower,  and  their  hopes  fell.  It  sank  into  a  belt  of  reddened  cloud  and "
"went on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world, and "
"give  him a present, if he  won the game;  but when  Gollum went to fetch it  "
"Lothaire Salmoni,4018528319982312,24-07-1976
"
trying to do?' 
"fish, and then she has her way with them. D'you remember old Ufthak? We lost  "
"fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was "
"roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to crack and fall at the  "
"I  wonder why 'tis called so; for if I were a king, I would have plants more "
"trembling.  Every  now and again the drum-beats  throbbed and rolled:  doom, "
said Aragorn. 'Yet I hope that ere long you will  return to my land with the 
""
"Carie Durtnel,4041594067993,03-10-1999
"
"tunnel,  beheld a  plain,  a great  circle, somewhat  hollowed  like a  vast  "
When did you part with them? When would they reach that accursed valley?' 
wide  flat stone.  The  little upland lawn  was  open upon the  East and was 
"him, was very present to his mind, when he looked at Faramir and listened to "
"Rhetta Ladson,4616450073499662,26-03-1997
"
Fredegar  Bolger).  'Someone must get there and  warm the house  before  you  
"the leafy sunlight. 'Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel?' he said. "
lie now upon you and your kindred.' 
said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.' 
listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.' But what he thought 
and  a flight of steps down on  to  the grass.  Boys were playing  among the 
""
"####-fleets  of  boats  on  the  waters,  and  some  were  filled  with  gold  and  some  with "
"upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master. "
"that Dwarves  are grasping  and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli son of  Gluin, "
"he noticed, not far from the further  end of  the fire, a small dark  figure "
"himself, though in the  Shire he was chiefly remembered for  his Herblore of "
"will  get  little  enough,  I  doubt  not.  Take  him,  if  you  wish  him  to  live;  and  no "
"'if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be  "
"Hervey Tweddle,4181554202258827,20-07-1993
"
"Forester Cardero,4041590331913064,29-10-1979
"
"is  renewed. But who  are  you  that  sit  in  the  plain  as  foes  before  defended walls?"" "
was coming and  the sky above was growing dim. He turned and found that  the 
That does not sound elvish to me. Elves made all  the old   words: they began 
"Agnese Jendrys,4898457397970400,19-02-1981
"
"long since he went north. It is time the songs began to prove themselves again."" "
near. I will take it.' 
"You are still some miles north of the path which we should have been following, if "
"always  hungry,  for  they were extremely careful with  their provisions. Even  so, as "
Chapter 7. The Mirror of Galadriel 
cheeks  like  red apples.  Yet their eyes were still  the eyes  of  our  own 
"wandered  down to the battle of the Orcs  and  the Riders  of Rohan.  'Well, "
####-     And then his tongue was loosed and  his voice cried in a language which  
"themselves came  to him,  who arrayed Boromir  as for a funeral? Not Orcs or  "
and ran glistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel. 
"     Then just as  he  was putting his hand  to the hilt of his sword, there "
"Tobin Bowie,4873210577688360,11-01-1987
"
"his sleep. Minutes or hours passed  slowly, and  nothing happened. Frodo was "
"dwarves,  and other vague figures difficult to make out away  in the shadows "
"him at first, till it became too frequent to bother about. I do not know how long he "
of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? ' 
"shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already level with the Orcs, "
"Suellen Alexsandrev,4041373206879,08-12-1987
"
the throat with a great jewel  of green that shone  from afar;  but his head 
"whom you would deliver us. You are a liar. Saruman, and a corrupter of men's "
among the sweet sad words that they could not understand. 
Book II  
West. 
"men and captains who stood by and spoke, so that his voice rang over all the "
"lurking  in  her den, while the power of  Sauron grew, and light and  living "
"Willis Riggert,4041372834811578,05-08-1978
"
"I saw a light -like  eyes. I  have thought so  often, since we first  entered "
"one up in the air, if they can fly.  I'm  thinking we'd  best lay up in this "
"####-boom. If any man fell,  crushed by a stone hurtling  from above,  two others "
"Mayne Viccary,4041374283959643,10-10-1996
"
be a spy  within  my  very  chamber?  And yet  in our speech together I have 
"Imrahil; and Legolas and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to  go also, so that "
once again it  is shown  that looks may belie the man  -  or the  halfling. I 
"     'Be careful,  friends!' cried  Gildor laughing. 'Speak no secrets! Here "
"""Arrow!""  said  the  bowman.  ""Black  arrow!  I  have  saved  you  to  the  last.  You "
"river, and the great shoulder of the south-pointing mountain-spur drew ever nearer. "
"said, stooping down to frown at the hobbit with his bushy eyebrows. "
West in the Day before days when the world was young. 
"cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!' "
not 
"behind me, and she  shall take me to the woods, but not  to her sisters. And "
"     a distant flame before the Sun, "
"     'Come now, ride with me!' "
"before the people of the Shire,  whom they refer  to as ""colonists""; but  in "
I should like to know?' 
"heard many tales upon their long road.  It was a skyless world, in which his "
dim. 
laughed Legolas. 'You will make a rider yet.' 
####- 
path.' 
"going to the harbours, out away beyond the  White Towers.' Sam waved his "
"was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after  him, that he was within a step "
"the travellers  lay  a wide ravine, with  great rocky sides to which  clung, "
"     He took off  the  Ring, moved  it may be  by some  deep premonition  of "
"us,' he whispered. 'The tricksy lights. Candles  of corpses, yes, yes. Don't "
"then we shall  have  no returning. If it  is saved, then the orc-host itself "
listened 
He raised his staff.  There was a roll of thunder. The  sunlight was blotted 
you mean by they?' 
"Shire neither, if what we  hear is true.  Funny goings on, they say. But one "
"still  rose  and  fell, sometimes  loud  and strong, sometimes low  and sad, "
"your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires,  as far as  you can reckon "
other powers at work far stronger.' 
"     'I  have no fitting  gifts  to  give you at our parting,' said Faramir ; "
the 
gleamed as if it were wet. The  many  faces of the  stone had sharp edges as 
""
"arrayed most of  the strength that he had, for here the  defence seemed more "
"     'Hm, hoom!'  said  Treebeard,  when at last  their story  had wound and "
"Dru Daltry,4017955974397588,24-04-1997
"
with both hands.  
     `Then if the  Ring cannot be  kept  from him for ever by strength' said 
were  and scored with deep ghylls. In the end they were  forced to  go  back  
"     Then Aragorn took  the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast, and "
"say dwelt, was, grew. What about is? Is he dead?' "
"hills to lose  itself  in the stagnant marshland, and they went up along its "
"much hurt?"" "
dragons 
"contrive  it. How  that is to be done cannot  be guessed, but first we  must  "
"Maxine Trevillion,4041592491701735,07-11-1992
"
     'What would you do in my service?' 
grass is deep and springy.' 
"Daryl Hevey,4124458645722,22-01-1983
"
"their fashion be at one, and keep hope while they may, and after hope  still "
"leering,  squint-eyed.  Do  you  know,  they  reminded  me at  once of  that "
"stone, his head dropping  sideways and his   breathing heavy. In his  lap lay "
staff into  the midst of it.  At once a great spout  of green and blue flame 
"Henka Champ,4041597292739,22-04-1992
"
"Mace Lockitt,4041599311701,18-02-1994
"
""
"hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until "
boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled  bodies. Five dead Orcs 
     With  that  he  turned away and went with Pippin down towards the lower 
Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty years  had passed since 
"still  fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage  of the River from "
"at  all without  getting wet, scratched, and muddy.  They  halted, wondering  "
"the Shadow Host withdrew to the shore. There they stood silent, hardly to be  "
     He walked forward  to the wall. Right  between the shadow  of the trees 
""
"any of the Big People were  like that.  I thought, well, that  they were just "
generous  supper was  laid  on the large table.  The kitchen  was  lit  with 
"Godfry Boyland,4017959962787834,27-11-1975
"
     In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.' 
mountains;  and  those  who  were going  to  Rivendell sat  on the hill  and 
####-     'But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings of 
"Sonya Silverstone,4898033226989489,21-03-1997
"
that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager  to 
backs. Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream. 
""
"be clearly  seen,  pale  and  dusty; one  winding  back  northwards; another  "
"Marshal, and I have  removed  all our  herds  and herdfolk, withdrawing them "
"     'It  is likely that  he will  be  fit  to arise tomorrow, for  a  short "
"It  is at  Osgiliath that he  will  put his weight, as before  when  Boromir "
"Pacorro Greenhowe,4041597275953246,05-02-1985
"
He cried  out;  and sat  up. staring in bewilderment at all the  faces round 
did not seem depressed. 
"Tobey Coldrick,4041596516401,24-04-1986
"
towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.' 
and has many secrets; yet  it looks not to be  a work of craft. It cannot be 
"     Treebeard raised  himself  from  his  bed  with a jerk,  stood  up, and "
"     'Him?' said  the  landlord in  an  answering whisper,  cocking  an  eye "
     `Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.' 
ahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come there: rocks and 
"down the Bridge Inn and built  this dismal place instead, you'll have to put "
"beyond the measure of Men, and  he sang an elven-song in a clear voice as he "
"night, when Merry came  back to Aragorn. He  had only a light bundle, for he "
"handsome Ent,  got caught in a spray of some  liquid fire and burned like  a  "
rising  right  above  the  hobbit's  head;  at  times  they  were  marching  along  quiet  as 
"""No  time  now!""  said  the  hobbit.  ""You  must  follow  me!  We  must  all  keep "
The bells were ringing in the dale 
"seated. They sprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they "
spread. But not Ents. There are no Entings.' 
"     'May I?' said Merry, surprised and delighted.  'That would be splendid!' "
"     The Captains mounted  again  and rode back, and from the host of Mordor "
""
another  blackness  could  be  seen  whirling  forward;  but  it  did  not  come  with  the 
     'The Paths of the Dead?' said Pippin.  'I heard Aragorn say  that and I 
"and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red light in the land "
"on this!"" "
 
poplars in the breeze. 
####-     The  woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger and 
sits  at ease  again  in  Meduseld.  Many hopes will wither  in this  bitter  
materials for  the history  of  N®menor and the  arising of  Sauron.  It was 
dwelt in Middle-earth. You do not  look evil! And since you come with an Elf 
"     'Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet,' said Frodo. "
""
"with Thorin too, and he knew what be was driving at. "
"Oswell MacCleay,4041370898368303,06-06-1998
"
"answer  was  all  round  him  anyway.  ""Dark!""  he  said  without  even  scratching  his "
end in broken steps of rock; for out from the main range there sprang a high 
"     'As you wish. I care  not,' said Boromir.  'Yet may I not even speak of "
"     'O yes,  there's a tunnel,' said Gollum. `But hobbits  can rest  before "
bowstring is anywhere  to be  heard.  A  waiting  silence broods  above  the 
of Saruman which might  be  lies.  Long ere I came to  Isengard I had  heard 
"     `Not very good perhaps, but to the point  -- if you need more beyond the "
"We  may well be seen  by watchers  on that narrow path,  and waylaid by some "
"with minor  items not  addressed to  them,  or  with  anything  that  seemed "
"There were  three  official  meals: lunch,  tea, and dinner (or supper). But "
"     'We wouldn't  ask  you  to,' said Merry. 'We have had  enough  of  Orcs "
"""Is  this  true?""  asked  the  Master.  As  a  matter  of  fact  he  thought  it  far  more "
     Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly to 
give you some good advice  - but I shall want a reward.' 
all round  the north side of Isengard. There was  no  sign of enemies nor of 
"stone  channel a stream of clear water flowed,  sparkling and chattering. At  "
shoulders bowed before her. The sword broke sparkling into many shards.  The 
was in a fey mood  running  heedlessly to meet them. Turning  his  eyes away 
Frodo ordered the gates to be locked again. There was some sense at any rate 
found a path  that  led higher and higher on  to  the mountain; but  they did not dare 
"if you had  never heard the strange  name before. You have,  and so have  I. "
a 
"pinch."" "
""
""
"prize, he  stepped  too far, toppled, wavered for a moment on the brink, and "
"Abra Hulstrom,4715764496785741,28-04-1983
"
"and crossed the bridge and came to  the doors,  and all  the house was filled "
     And saw in wander flowers of gold  
head fell like a stone.  Backward she sprang  as the huge  shape  crashed to 
and down. 
down  stream.  It  is as  if the twilight under  endless trees were  flowing 
"     Suddenly the River  swept round a bend, and the banks rose  upon either "
the deep dark outside the  under -gate of the orcs'  stronghold;  its  brazen 
"you? What was  the promised price? When all the  men were  dead, you were to "
memory of loveliness in far days and of his first grief; and her robe seemed 
"     'We must be off,' he said. 'Half a moment!' Grishnbkh's sword was lying "
"     After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son, "
""
"with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.' "
"Kristofer Phillip,4041374487049,16-01-1995
"
"was  lying  in a soft slimy bog,  and  springing up  he set  his fool on the "
'but it was foolish.' 
descended like a steep stair into the plain. 
"don't  like my Burglar, please don't damage him. Put him down,  and  listen first  to "
"this song of mine is to be finished  before the end of the evening, and I am "
"Durante Haslum,4137088270912275,05-03-1994
"
"gold wrought and unwrought, gems and jewels, and silver red-stained in the ruddy "
this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can -  but all the 
"tree, stood a basin  of silver.  wide  and shallow, and beside  it  stood  a  "
     Chapter 2   The Shadow of the Past  
"####-for sitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.' "
"sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand. "
     Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping. 
"     'It's an  ill wind as  blows nobody no good, as I always say. And All's "
"####-time to  waste; for he  that  strikes the  first blow, if he strikes it hard "
"     'But there aren't any  gates,' said  Merry, 'not  on the Road; you know "
delight. 
"Anborn. Treat  him gently, but watch  him.  And do not you,  Smjagol, try to "
shown 
"     'Nonsense, Lindir,'  snorted Bilbo. 'If you can't distinguish between a  "
"strong for his will to  overcome barred  the way. He  looked about, and then  "
"posts  and blocks of  masonry go rocketing  up hundreds  of feet, and  smash "
"Hermann Kleinstein,4041599409731159,17-07-1989
"
"feet of the Elf.  On he led them, into the  mouth of darkness,  and still on "
out  that  part  of  their  story  was  true;  but  he  had  found  more  than  that:  he  had 
"small, and he was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy words. More than "
"Frodo,' he said.  `No, they didn't get everything! You lent me Sting, if you  "
"kindly West. Some  courage  and  some wisdom, blended  in measure.  If more of us "
and booms there welled voices singing high and strong. 
"land,  as  quick  as water  flows,  or  quicker. But  the  dwarves were  all  for  supper  as "
Frodo. 
"Steven Gillbanks,4099367606326475,22-06-1994
"
     'Do what?' said Pippin. 
"     'Seven days,' said Faramir. 'But think not il l of me, if I say  to you: "
"####-most to be feared. And at all times  they smell the blood  of living things,  "
"hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat them, eat them!' "
"     By his  advice  they  decided to make nearly  due North from his house, "
to  serve his master  as a girdle and bind  the grey cloak close  about  his 
     `Come! ' said Haldir.  `All is now ready  for you. Enter the boats! But 
"     'I did not  shoot, for I  dared not arouse any  cries:  we cannot  risk  "
"mystery had been  thoroughly discussed. 'N ow what have  you been doing,  Mr. "
a while! ' 
growing round him. It did not  at first show him what kind of a place he was 
"there.  'Your master is not himself,' he  said. 'Go slow! Bring  no fire  to "
bare  shoulder of rock and plunged into the  gloom  of  soft -sighing  trees.  
"Gandalf. 'But  at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that "
"Speak, or  I will  make a dint in your hat that even  a wizard will find  it "
"Frodo all this while, what d'you want  to leave  him for, as soon  as things "
"Bobina Spreadbury,4017952059798,30-09-1987
"
"""Back  to  the  Mountain!""  cried  the  dwarves  as  if  they  had  not  heard  him;  so "
"     'No!'  answered Frodo,  coming back to himself  out  of  darkness,  and "
"Thane Sainsbury,4041375445601833,19-01-1992
"
"doorway was  outlined, though not a  crack or joint had been visible before. "
"     'He is  stout and strong,'  said Aragorn. 'Let  us  hope  that he  will "
steep  rocky  bank. Here the Company decided to stay and await the  dawn: it 
"""Don't talk to yerself!"" said Tom. ""But if you wants to sit on the last one, sit on "
last  they  were  going  to  escape  really  and  truly  from  the  dreadful  mountains.  He 
Some got all the wolves together in a pack. Some stacked fern and brushwood 
     'Don't know till we've had a look.' 
"     He went out, and soon after all the  others followed. The day was st ill "
"     They fell  forward, grovelling  heedlessly on the cold earth.  But  the "
"     'What is  that to  you?' he answered. 'Will you  still  order my goings,  "
"Dynah Minelli,4017950650986,21-09-2000
"
"""Well!""  said  Bilbo,  ""I  never  expected  to  be  looking  out  of  this  door.  And  I "
wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?' 
speed  to our foes and sets an unseen barrier before us: a weariness that is 
"Meaghan Boldra,4041378807697,19-03-1990
"
"dimmed, but otherwise than in  Shelob's  lair. All things about him now were "
"Mark! Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to our welcome!' "
"the River;  but some (old Butterbur, for instance)  knew a thing or two, and "
"Now you can understand why Gandalf, listening to their growling and yelping, "
"perhaps, and  made by the weathering  and splitting  of the rock, for it was "
"questions, and know what Bilbo was going to do, and all about it. "
"noon lay  on the  green land  of  the Tongue, and  the water  glittered with "
"island, of which Bilbo knew nothing,  not far off in the dark  water. There, "
holiday in which business was at a standstill. 
"South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I  have bidden "
"answer's  not  a  kettle  boiling  over,  as  you  seem  to  think  from  the  noise  you  are "
"     `The creature is wretched and hungry,' said Frodo, `and unaware of  his "
     The  story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 'Look!' said  Merry. 
singing. 
began to draw together into thickets.  
"Ange Roxbrough,4041378597314,10-05-1981
"
and 
"     They went on. But before  long the snow was falling fast,  filling  all "
""
"Keelia Medwell,4017951487438,30-08-1975
"
""
"before, he threw some more stones at these, and at others that had stopped behind; "
"""But—"" said Bilbo. "
stream there was a gap in the stone-wall beside the road. Through this  they 
"Sheridan Baldacco,4041379184500,06-08-2001
"
"go behind the king's banner in the centre. Elfhelm, lead your company to the "
"promised  to  wake  old  Bombur  at  midnight,  too!  Really  I  must  be  going,  and "
     As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It turned 
rode off into the gathering night. The people cheered. 
Dori was really a decent fellow in spite of his grumbling. Poor Bilbo could not 
at any rate that the Enemy will least expect us to take.' 
over the wide seas of the night. 
entrance!  Hurriedly  Bilbo  stepped  back  and  blessed  the  luck  of  his  ring.  Then 
"     `I  hope  that  is  it,'  answered Aragorn.  `But I  have  a  sense  of "
"Tamas Fishe,4017958220918322,12-08-1997
"
dwarves shivered. 
under them. Long  it  seemed to them that they sat  and  were afraid; but at 
in her exile.' 
 * BOOK VI *  
comes the end of our fellowship in Middle-earth.  Go in peace!  I  will  not 
####-bosses.' 
"in might again, Isildur summoned the  Men of  the Mountains to  fulfil their "
"     'A cage,' she said. 'To stay behind bars, until use and old age  accept "
had forgotten  all about me. I am  glad  to see you back. It has been a long 
Legolas.  
"passed,' he said.  They  stood up, and then they both stared in wonder. Away "
"empty night: there was  nothing more to find out,  nothing worth doing, only "
Prancing  Pony he spoke of. I hope  it'll be like The Green Dragon away back  
"     An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected  by his experience,  "
"ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last "
"Caves! Holes to fly to in time of  war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas, "
"scraped on its surfaces by the faint quiver of empty seed-plumes, and broken  "
"""There is the birth of the Running River,"" said Thorin. ""From here it hastens to "
""
"about, if  that was  what was  happening. Shagrat's company had seemed to be "
' 
rebuild it and set it up anew?' 
"me. You shall  be  my esquire,  if you  will.  Is  there gear of war in this "
All  the same he suddenly refused  to go a step further and flung himself on  the 
that they  are  come  from those same  Three  Houses  of  Men  as  were  the 
""
"the ladder, if  you can, Mr. Frodo;  and don't you let it down till you hear "
"####-brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.' "
     Tomorrow we may come this way 
"was  set  another  fortress,  greater and more  strong.  Thither,  eastward, "
"still  singing  in  the  trees,  as  if  they  had  not  stopped  since  he  left;  and  as  soon  as "
"""Sssss,""  said  Gollum,  and  became  quite  polite.  ""Praps  ye  sits  here  and  chats "
"Luckwearer;  and  I  am  Barrel-rider,"" went  on Bilbo  beginning  to  be  pleased with "
"Phylys Kermode,4041592356109,01-05-1981
"
"Juanita Forrestor,4017950763992202,03-07-2001
"
"""Behold! the birds are gathering back again to the Mountain and to Dale from "
""
"Evan Salvador,4041591218334,11-03-1999
"
"dreamed: blue sky and never a cloud, and the sun dancing on the water. Now they "
"'Great  deed was the riding of  the Paths  of the Dead, and great  it  shall "
"Bilbo  felt  that  it was unsafe  to  shout,  and he  stood  a  long while wondering  in "
everybody falling over bodies  and hitting one another! You nearly chopped off my 
"company was all mounted, and he was  about to leap into the saddle, when the "
"from this western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a  "
"broken pillar  here and  there,  peering out of bushes  at  the side, or old "
####-Gandalf's hand. 
"     The  chasm was long and  dark,  and filled  with the noise of wind  and "
"it, or go away and leave it?' "
for the trail was no longer easy to  follow. Here the highlands of the  Emyn 
tent had been pitched for  him beside the king's  lodging; and there he  sat 
"aside; and  then he saw,  rising  black,  blacker and  darker than  the vast  "
"Hastie McBain,4041595135864,01-01-1996
"
"     'I  hear them,' said  Jomer; 'but they are only the scream of birds and "
"Pauletta Borthe,4041591665617651,10-09-1986
"
"Sherilyn Ruse,4428864601567444,11-06-1985
"
""
"Fred Zorzoni,4041592519177,19-05-1993
"
"lebethron, beloved of   the woodwrights of Gondor, and a  virtue has been set "
"     'I  couldn't stay  to  hear more, sir, since  you were  waiting; and  I "
"quicker, far quicker, if our minds are roused!  If we  are not hewn down, or  "
"     'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,'  said the wizard solemnly.  'There are many "
"bid him consider well  the claims  that have been urged, or be declared our  foe. At "
"Brocky Caunter,4041592267199,21-09-1983
"
"there  they would  gather in  times  of fear, thronging round  the Stone and "
"my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening,  not of roosting "
"     The world was young, the mountains green, "
to lead  all  his  Riders on  the eastward road. Hearts were heavy  and  many 
"rather  than hope;  for  then he was thinking of himself. Now, for a moment,  "
"Bobina Giovanardi,4041599487139127,16-11-1975
"
"over. A chill air seemed to  strike his face,  rising from invisible depths. "
"round  red  face. 'Hallo! Hallo!  And who may you  be, and what  may you  be "
     'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!  
one  spoke of them. They  were now reluctant either to  stay  or go  on; but 
"Karalee Bownass,4041376616504,26-07-1979
"
hillside.  There  it left the trees and faded into the turf.  The wood stood 
"Lanita Revelle,4017951279978420,17-01-1999
"
"     On September the twenty-first  they set out together, Frodo on the pony "
of the Fountain where the White Tree once had grown. 
"     `We have  not found what we sought,' said one. `But what have we found? "
     'Will you not bring me to him? Then you will know. ' 
Annyn 
we plunged into the deep water and all was  dark. Cold it was as the tide of 
your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.' 
"heart to make a joke again. ""A mercy it is,"" he said at last to himself, ""that I woke "
"Gates Heining,4041591258066,28-08-1975
"
"     Frodo drew himself up, and again  Sam was startled by his words and his "
marched  with  their  broad  hands  stuck  in  their  gold  and  silver  belts  to  join  the 
it goes  to  my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter  
"""Well  to  tell you  the  truth,  I did not  like  to bother you with a  lot of us, until  I "
"     'Well, now we're off at last!'  said  Frodo. They shouldered their packs "
"     Then an old  wife, Ioreth, the eldest  of the women who  served in that "
"drink, often and heartily, being fond  of simple  jests at all times, and of "
"and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan,  and ye sons of  Elrond, and "
faces of  the Riders  that sat within  hearing turned pale at the words. 'If 
"     ' ""For the present,"" said he, and rode into the darkness.  "
"and Frodo's cracking. If that's where  you get your news from, you'll  never  "
"gathered in the  shadow of the cliffs, until  the assault  above was hottest  "
their  coming  until  they  came  out  in  the  broken  lands  which  divided  the  Lonely 
"trampling the fallen,  he rode forth, heeding no  longer any dart. He halted "
"and put back on the shelf!"" "
"Inness Mendenhall,4017955909681676,23-07-1986
"
"     To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come "
stretched away before them to the edge of sight. 
pay 
gates  that  closed  by  magic;  and  it  was  no  good  grumbling  in  the  passages  until 
away.' 
"     `Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel speaking "
"appeared in the darkness. And now he was face to face with a furious  enemy, "
     'What will they do?' asked Legolas in astonishment. 
""
"White  Face, not  yet. It will go behind  the  hills soon, yess. Rest  a bit "
"password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.' "
"afterwards;""  but  he  thought  it  better  to  say  nothing  at  all,  and  to  let  go  his  clutch "
"Faramir, but each time more fa intly to their hearing, as  if Aragorn himself "
""
of Legolas  that a white flame  flickered  on the  brows  of Aragorn  like a  
"their fear of the Orcs died away, and their pace slackened. A queer stifling "
clamorous 
"the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear  the slow firm "
"""He'll be eaten if we don't 'do something,"" said Thorin, for there were howls all "
protruding fangs; the mouth snarled like an animal. 
long ago. It is a very terrible place  now. Travellers shiver  when they see 
"     'O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south, "
is with him; only he would have taken his pack.' 
"before the Gate and rising shrill and piercing into the sky passed, and died "
"avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.  "
"beneath the Moon,  outstayed their day,  and in hideous eyrie bred this last "
"     The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of  Gollum. They did now know,  "
"while  you  can, little fool!' he said then to Pippin, in the Common Speech, "
from the other runes?** That marks a hidden passage to the Lower Halls. 
actually a good deal less of me. I hope the  thinning process will not go on 
"made gardens to live in. But  we Ents went on wandering, and we only came to "
once more from the entrance. He was just about to step out on to the floor when he 
This  will  hide some of the tell-tales.' He put a large  black cloak  round 
"against. He is fallen, and his cure is beyond us;  but  I would still  spare "
"hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a  "
"that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.' "
"dragon,  or  so  I  have  always  heard,""  said  Balin  anxious  to  comfort  him.  ""I  think "
"marked like ores with a red  eye-shaped blotch, buzzed and stung;  and above "
great gloom  still crawled  onwards  and a little light leaked through them. 
was 
"     Down the  road from the  gate they  fled. In fifty paces, with a  swift  "
"happy, and were rubbing their bruised and damaged legs and feet. "
"victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself  a mighty king, "
"     'Not far, not far! ' said a  voice  above him. He looked up and saw the "
"world  stood  still,  but their  hearts were dead and their last  hope gone. "
was pouring out black smoke into the evening air. 
"Padraig Swynley,4041374985467481,11-05-1999
"
folk as  can deal with troubles  out of hand. I don't  doubt you'll soon set 
"hoard  or  goblin  plunder,  for  dragons  and  goblins  destroyed  that  city  many  ages "
"""No, none at all, not one,"" he said immediately afterwards. "
"     'And  that may well befall,' said Gimli.  'For the faces of Aragorn and "
"     'Dull and dreary indeed!' said Merry: 'You must  not go to the  Havens, "
"'Ah,  yes!  Old Gandalf. Three  months  back he walked  right  into  my room "
     Chapter 11  A Knife in the Dark   
"arose and went out, and he sent for  the sons of  Elrond,  and together they "
####-they believe  your  master has a deadly  wound that will subdue him to their  
"and  leaves  were  falling  fast,  three  large  boats  left  Lake-town,  laden with  rowers, "
"would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now! Often said I'd come to a "
under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!' 
"eyeses  will  notice  him;  and  he'll  come  creepsy  and  tricksy  and  catch  us,  gollum, "
"Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!' "
"     `Now, now! ' said Sam. `Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes  you, "
"men wilted with fear. But Gandalf had spoken  soft words to him,  and he had "
"freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-place: for  this "
"Wandie Pollington,4041378836170806,06-08-1994
"
growing in the same way: the Ents gave their love to things that they met in 
"Starla Sustin,4454406822431807,24-09-1997
"
stretched out. 
as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other 
out of the darkness. 
"Rivendell were gathered. But  those near  him were silent,  intent upon  the "
awaits 
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.' 
     But that I am afraid will be just your luck.' 
"not made, all the same, for hobbit-legs, and Bilbo was just feeling that he could go "
     It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly 
thump to the ground a good way below. Wriggling along the branch (which made 
"     'Jowyn! Jowyn!'  cried  Merry.  Then tottering, struggling up, with her  "
night. 
came  into view. One was  clad in ragged  brown and was armed with a  bow of 
"gone now beyond recall, gone for ever.' "
merely lots  of  people  eating and drinking  -  continuously from elevenses 
"Laetitia Aimson,4041370399818657,29-11-1991
"
"from the  covert he  could see only a dun, shadowless  world,  fading slowly "
"thatched with gold. The light  of it shines  far over the land. Golden, too, "
other folk he can spare.' 
amid the ruins of Osgiliath. 
"Legra Barnbrook,4017959570540,28-09-1977
"
"     `No,  I  don't  know,' said  Gorbag's voice. `The messages  go  through "
"Emlynne Fearby,4041590364821473,04-03-1977
"
"After  a  while  they  came  to  a  belt  of  tall  and  very  ancient  oaks,  and  beyond "
but still they cannot find me! 
"     'Well, the  Tale is now  told, from first to last. Here we all are, and "
it's going to be nothing but a drag and a burden every step. So what's to be 
"of which Jomer had spoken, coming down from the East out of the Wold. "
 
before him and leaning  slightly towards one another like the pillars  of  a  
"Adolpho Do Rosario,4041596270801,05-12-1987
"
"others.  'But bless you!' he laughed, getting up and waving his arms, 'I give "
"     There were many birds about the cliffs and  the  rock -chimneys, and all "
"gift!"" and he brought out a necklace of  silver and pearls  that Dain had given him "
     'Go on!' said Frodo faintly. 
"time evil things came  forth, and they took Minas Ithil and abode in it, and "
"pitiless, towards the desert that lay at Sauron's gate. "
"he says, is soon to come, before the ending of the year. "
strong.' 
they 
"Antoine Fenne,4017953054228,20-09-1977
"
"and out  of the  arch, but its  course was changed further  up the gorge, by "
"soon lost in the West. There still he stood  far into the night, hearing only "
"Salomi Penwright,4041597832709123,28-03-1977
"
"little while we can pretend that we are all back safe  at Bree again,  or in "
"for you,' he answered. "
"happily, but it was singing nonsense: "
"     ' ""What for?"" says she. "
"in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters. ' "
     his footsteps on the Hill were heard; 
"back  to  Bilbo's  own  door.  ""Bless  me!  What's  going  on?""  he  cried.  There  was  a "
"Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not  without wonder. At  length  he spoke "
"been part of his bad dreams, as he had rather hoped. Indeed he was really relieved "
"Bess Stoute,4440624454769214,06-11-1996
"
"you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect "
"the moon went by. Shadows fell down from the hills, and all grew dark before "
"and twelve torches stood about it, and twelve  guards, knights both of Rohan "
face was more beautiful even than in life. 
"     'Here are some treasures that you let fall,' said Aragorn. 'You will be "
"needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly flowers of Morgul "
"Berta Blakesley,4809292508199,11-06-1993
"
"as you know how: his men have fought a great fight with the Orcs. Maybe, you  "
####-was  finishing  his  second  cake  and  beginning  to  think  that  he  had  escape 
still hanging by his belt; and hidden away in a pocket of his tunic next his 
     'You have  looked in that accursed stone of  wizardry!' exclaimed Gimli 
"events. They said  nothing whatever about the Ring, and did not tell him why "
"     `Yrch!' said  the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the flet the "
a loud voice upon the road. So they went on until they drew near to the borders of 
learned all this lore. 
"king  of  dwarves,  and  as  kind  as  summer. He  comes  into. many  tales, but his part "
and  Sam a  little  way within. and Gollum crouched upon the ground near the 
"     'But they go with a great  speed for all that,' said Aragorn, 'and they "
     'And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host and broke 
"down  there?""  he  thought.  It was. As  he went  forward  it  grew  and  grew,  till  there "
"he came down,  bang, into a  tray full of mugs, and slipped, and  rolled off "
noticed  that  behind the  hedge at  the road-side a long low  hut had  been 
"one thing,  he noted  that Gollum used  I, and that  seemed usually to be  a  "
""
you 
"     'Surely,' he cried, 'this is  the greatest jest  in  all the history of "
"see your chapters of  our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I  think, and "
"     `And all the arrows of all the hunters  in the world would be in vain,' "
"sorry  business  altogether.  Not  that  I  venture  to  disagree  with  Thorin,  may  his "
     Gandalf stood  up. He  spoke  sternly. 'You will be  a fool if  you do. 
"and walking  slowly  forward. His hand  showed white as  he held it up, palm "
"as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.' "
"them  somewhere else  the better. Sam viewed  the hollow with great dislike, "
"     to catch a fish, "
Hobbits go home. Don't go to the Gate! ' 
"we  are  too  far  to  the North,  and  have  some  awkward  country  ahead. And we  are "
"Shire, that my realm  lies  also in the  North, and I shall  come there  one "
"Chen Houseley,4041597533868,17-07-1992
"
"will, save only those who have already a great power  of their own.  But for "
""
"Malanie Camis,4041375361515421,02-11-1988
"
night  comes  on;  and  already  shadows  are  lengthening.  They  can  smell  our 
"Ware Caldicot,4041591117041633,30-03-1986
"
"see that it is  not so. Indeed  you know  little of Orcs, if  you go hunting "
against  the dry scored rind of  the ancient tree and scorched  it. A tremor  
"Cloe Screas,4041379876238,16-10-1992
"
with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. 'The devilry! What mischief has he  
that none trouble us for one hour.' 
"     Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties! "
old weathered  stone once long  ago vomited  from the  Mountain's  furnaces. 
him from hesitation. `I  wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a 
even at a  few paces. And I've heard that he doesn't like Sun or Moon.' 
"     'I  know what you have come to say, Frodo: you wish to  return to  your "
stood motionless looking down. There was no sound. 
The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above  the others.  It was 
went  to  and  fro bearing cups and  pouring  drink; others brought  food on 
"many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so "
up and stowed it lovingly in his pack. 
and  to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side 
"news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again."" "
"would go  Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite  of his hurt  the  dwarf "
never  imagined  that  any  water  that  was  not  the  sea  could  look  so  big.  It  was  so 
"We bring  little  provision,  for we  rode forth  to open  battle,  not to a  "
"Thengel,' said  Gandalf. 'Has not the  messenger from your gate reported the "
"hollow tube; then he blew or called through them. A great hoom, hom rang out "
that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I  wish I could  
"the path. If you stepped behind, you found a low arch in the side of the mountain. "
rumours that you have  heard are  true: he  has indeed arisen again and left 
"Westbrooke MacNish,4041599030804235,06-08-2000
"
"without  all healing virtue: he was stronger, more able  to  bear his burden "
now  little  known. But  Boromir  and Aragorn  doubtless  do  not  need this 
"become almost  like trees, at least to look at. They stand here and there in "
' 
coming back to Middle-earth made  war upon him to regain the Silmarils which 
####-shadow of the Great Darkness  lying there still away north; and bad memories 
 
and independent: they belonged to  nobody but themselves; but they were more 
more! '  His voice sounded  thin and shrill  in his  own  ears.  The  Riders 
     In  the  afternoon Ugl®k's  troop overtook the  Northerners.  They were 
"increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and Mordor, "
"was  once Gandalf's superior: head  of  the  Council, whatever  that  may be "
what it saw was not a small frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword:  
"from notes by Frodo  or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they "
"     'That's all right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rubbing  his sleeve across his "
"hardly left  your  side, day or night, except to run  messages. Elrond is  a  "
"Clarita Grigorkin,4606481146076254,25-03-1976
"
"Billy Franken,4179030861197,31-08-1997
"
     Sam was out of his hiding in a flash and crossed the  space between him 
As cold as death; 
"     'He lies  within,' said Denethor, 'burning, already burning. They  have "
"shimmered in  his  white hair like  sun in the spray of a fountain,  but his "
he  sometimes  thought  he  could  catch  glimpses  of  the Misty Mountains  small  and 
was wise.' 
"     Maybe Frodo  felt  it,  not knowing it, as he  had upon Amon  Hen, even "
"healing,  to preserve  all  things  unstained.  These things  the  Elves  of "
"bearing no charge nor device, was raised over Gondor for the last time. "
     There was a ringing clash and  a stab  of  white fire. The Balrog  fell 
"surrounds the  origin  of this peculiar  custom,  or  'art' as  the  Hobbits "
"thing he  loved, his 'precious', and he talked to  it, even when it  was not "
 
was 
"The King beneath the mountains, "
"before  them was the Anduin glittering in the sun, as it flowed away, out of "
"has served, save to give us a long and fruitless chase.' "
"hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and I  hope  the welcome is "
"to  the house at  Crickhollow, and  it was broken open and empty; but on the "
I must take leads me to Dunharrow.' 
"bundle  and  count  themselves  by  touch.  By  that  time  they  had,  of  course,  quite "
"Philippa Augie,4041373704482797,06-06-1990
"
"     'The  names  of all the stars, and of all living  things, and the whole "
"there to do them great damage, though the  light of the fires showed up many "
had even brought along some old clothes of  Frodo's to help  him  in playing  
"Kirsteni Gallager,4017957115389,24-01-1983
"
"####-there were  songs, dances, music, games,  and,  of course,  food  and drink. "
had been mislaid. 
"stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of his sword; he  looked  as  if some "
"your hand, did you not?' he said softly.  'But I who  was his father say that "
"say. But you  have broken  your fast  as well as any man in the Citadel, and "
and 
""
"riders  hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The  spell of Saruman "
 
We 
"     It was  now past  midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness "
"cross, we were coming out of the Lands over West into these countries-it is a long "
honour and arrayed as princes of the land.' 
"moon-letters  here,  beside  the  plain  runes  which  say  'five  feet  high  the  door  and "
Gildor that told me this;  and  later  they told me that you had  left  your 
than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back.' 
"O! What are you seeking, "
"     'Well,  this  is the end, Sam Gamgee,'  said a  voice by his side.  And "
""
thunder-battle.  You  know  how  terrific  a  really  big  thunderstorm  can  be  down  in 
"and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were  to be found with Bilbo in "
"west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a  "
"     'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' sa id Frodo "
"Lynnea Toye,4041375091539956,23-10-1988
"
"     'Then it  is true, as  Jomer reported, that  you are in league with the "
"Lizzy Kubach,4041375278413,01-09-1980
"
"get it back, and to bring our curses home to Smaug-if we can. "
"####-and in the darkening sky low clouds went hurrying  by, and their hearts sank  "
     silivren penna mnriel 
     The hobbits had  gone a few weary  miles when they halted. Frodo seemed 
on  by  narrow paths  among the folded lands. Their purpose was to hold this 
"yell of triumph. Then he licked his knife, and put it between his teeth, and "
"Kaylyn Cyples,4121792792715,16-02-1993
"
####-road  clear for a league  before  noon: tha t was the  order.  It  is  a  sad 
"forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth "
"I wanted another  companion, I should  not  agree to any such thing, until I "
"####-The  next  stone  went  whizzing  through  a  big  web,  snapping  its  cords,  and "
"Ulric Rimmer,4041373694374558,15-11-1998
"
"hearth,  until they filled all his vision,  and he seemed to be looking down "
"of  the  West.  There were his fine  new  friends, who would help him in his "
side of the lawn  there stood the mightiest  of  all  the trees;  its  great 
time. 
missing the trail  or  signs  of  other  coming and  going seems to  me  the 
little: it seemed cold and the noise  of the stream had become  faint.  Then 
"     'Where is  he?' said  Frodo, looking round, as if he  expected a masked "
"a rider now came out to meet them, and they turned from the road. "
seemed  to him that he looked  suddenly  into the heart of  an enemy and saw 
""
"sort. Still, I wonder if we shall ever be put into songs  or tales. We're in "
     With  that Beregond sprang  away  and ran off into the gloom. Ashamed of 
"     `I am an Elf and a  kinsman here,' said Legolas, becoming angry  in his "
"nails  gripped  and lifted him. He was  carried like a  sack  once more, and "
"road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save "
Day was dawning by that time. 
Mr. Brandybuck?' 
"Iris Filchagin,4323920815794,17-06-1992
"
was a ford  between low banks  much trampled by the  passage of horses.  The 
happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your bright streams.  
"kill before they get  me? They'll see the flame of  the  sword, as soon as I "
"folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our "
"arm-chair!"" he said. "
"even the best -fed were out and about again,  there  was a large crowd at Bag "
"     'You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,' said Aragorn. 'Is that so?' "
""
"     Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this  hopeful  tale,  he could "
"     'Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,' said Aragorn. Stooping he "
"ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a  great "
"     At the  king's  board sat  Jomer  and  the four guests, and there  also "
and kept out of sight of it as much  as they  could. But this hindered them; 
Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when  he fell. It has been treasured 
"stooping, and the other two stood staring at him. "
seized him by the arm. Gollum tore h imself loose and backed away. 
"direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill. "
"straight  at  Frodo.  The blow caught  him  on the right side, and Frodo was "
into a great hall. It was  lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at  either  
"The fire was red, it flaming spread; "
"of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you  "
     Gimli  took some  and rubbed it in his  palms and sniffed it. 'It feels 
"""Why  did  you  and  your  folk  three  times  try  to  attack  my  people  at  their "
by 
"north had been useless. The plain to their right was dim and smoky, and they "
"sixth circle, outside the walls of the citadel, there were some fair stables "
"traveller, unless driven by great need."" "
"     `If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,' said Gimli. "
"different:  less keen and lofty  was the  delight, but deeper and nearer  to "
""
"his girth and majesty. On  he came, straight towards  the watchers, and then "
"     'Look here, Cock -robin!' said  Sam. 'You're Hobbiton-bred and ought  to "
"Sayers Bosward,4041379229557674,20-11-1975
"
"Faber Sevin,4017959309330579,02-04-2000
"
they rode slowly homewards; and they spoke no word to one another until they 
think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.' 
such strength and heart and wits as you have.' 
"Sari Kopf,4017954826632,13-04-1986
"
The  others  who  were  busy  with  the  secret  of  the  door  had  no  more  success. 
come to  the woods  where  the  Silverlode  flows into the  Great  River -out 
"Sam bowed, but found nothing to say. He had forgotten how beautiful the Lady "
promise. 
were lines of large  boulders and hewn stones that  screened the  travellers 
"master's hands a nd laid  them together, palm to  palm, and kissed them;  and  "
"     `From signs that we have  seen lately,' said Gandalf,  'I fear that the "
"side,  so  that  the  hobbit  could  see  his  underparts  and  his  long  pale  belly  crusted "
"Tab Thomsen,4017952295822,03-03-1993
"
little rat-land  of the Shire-nay; do not  start! We know it well - here are 
"could  not see them, of course,  but the whole air  was full of creaking. It "
"set was made, only a day or two ago, by  heavy boots. At least one. I cannot  "
"Ky Mandrake,4041379915173034,25-09-1996
"
"within, rebuilding her clustered eyes, until with hunger like death she spun "
"truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore they are "
"Juliana Hegg,4017953051885,05-08-1985
"
"When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was delighted. ""Baggins!"" he exclaimed. ""Well I "
"and  saw leaning over him a  huge willow-tree,  old  and hoary. Enormous  it  "
"####-     `Yes,  yes, to  help the master: the  master of the Precious. But if we "
"     The day  was  now  growing,  and  the fog  had lifted a  little. It was "
They fled their hall to dying -fall 
"`He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish characters.' "
"     'Don't  be a  fool, Sam Gamgee,' came  an answer  in  his own voice. 'He "
you leave the Shire?' 
his 
"the wind  had gone, and the clouds had  dried  up,  and  the  day  had  been "
"Marney Gascoyen,4017955239959,06-07-1977
"
say 
hard roads  to the bare plain of Dagorlad: the field of  the  ancient battle 
"""We like the dark,"" said the dwarves. ""Dark for dark business! There are many "
"the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then-- "
That clear?' 
the dark to look for him.' 
Boromir was slain by the same Orcs whom you destroyed.' 
came suddenly over them  again. Ever since they had entered  the Forest they 
"dearly for the crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in  force to assail "
"thieving, and going about muttering to himself,  and gurgling in his throat. "
"Bryna Mashal,4041590944237,23-07-1985
"
"Vassili Joe,4017959958893,30-04-1995
"
"his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of "
dead city to the Nameless Pass. He turned hastily away. 
 
"     `But  that would kill  us, kill  us,'  whimpered  Gollum. `Cruel little "
"     All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and they had "
in some deep pit; or whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River  
"many steps leading down it to the river, across which a ford of huge flat stones led "
"Leigh Cartmell,4017957844763353,12-12-2000
"
"shattered his hopes completely. Just as well for him, as he agreed when he came to "
"     And Jowyn did not go, though her brother sent  word begging her to come "
"     There Thjoden fell, Thengling mighty, "
"     He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the front-door. "
"and for some time  he  would not  lift  his  face, but knelt forward on  his "
precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble.' 
"     'And  you need not  turn up your nose at the provender,  Master Gimli,' "
strong.' 
"Cinnamon Gencke,4269347782994,27-01-1975
"
"     There the portage-way, turning back  to the water -side, ran gently down "
"be short, a mere call of courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.' "
"""Get down!"" "
Havens in the long firth of Lune. 
guardian; and that alone is answer enough. ' 
"they halted, ending their first day's march. "
"you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware! ' "
"he would die of  it before  the  luck  turned, and how much  longer he would be able "
"woodlands  of  silver  shadow,  leading   them  ever  down,  southwards  and "
"below because of  the overhang of  the  cliff, nor  from  further off because  it was  so "
####- 
"Karoline Titchmarsh,4041592966735937,20-11-1990
"
"     'What  did  the Men of old use  them for?' asked Pippin, delighted  and "
"next-door neighbour),  'if they live  on  the wrong  side of the  Brandywine "
"eyes, and  then it seemed  that  they  could almost hear words,  cool words,  "
rightabouts!'  He climbed out  and went to the  farmer's side.  Black Riders 
####-<h4>Chapter 7 </h4> <br>
"when  Bilbo  tried  to  open  his  mouth  to  ask  a  question,  he  turned  and  frowned  at "
"     'Yes, the  shadow of doom,' said Beregond. 'I fear  that  Minas  Tirith "
hideous stench. 
are many. The dark things that were driven  out in  the year of the Dragon's 
"     'The work will be finished ere evening, ' said Ingold. 'This is the last  "
"smaller,  and  more  silent;  also  this  time  there were  no  trolls. At  each  point  on  the "
carven heads through which ran plaited leathern thongs.  
"half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes "
His report soon made the others as miserable as he was. 
it ran out again upon its  long journey south; to their right the road  from 
""
"flickered and  went  out,  and could not be  rekindled.  Of  the  time  that "
"battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.' Faramir sighed and fell "
could only say 'thag you very  buch'. I now repeat  it more correctly: Thank 
"to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell first, whatever happens.' "
a large round hole like the  mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at 
"     `Now  is  the  time! ' cried  Gandalf.  `Let us  go,  before the  troll "
     It was  early April and the sky was now clearing after  heavy rain. The 
"he leads you wrong, you will kill him.' "
of the Black Shadow  a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing  save a few 
"his  home, as he always said;  and no blame to  him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows "
heavily cloaked paced to and fro. 
South; though there was never friendship. In those days our bounds were away 
     From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning 
"wheeling, now flying on slowly southwards. "
wait.  As  he  stood just beyond the opening they saw his face  lit by a red 
What's your real name?' 
led  to  the  skirts of  the wood and  to  the entrance of  the old  forest  road. But Beorn 
"     'And if  not,' said Gandalf,  'I  will  ride  to Lossarnach with  Ioreth "
"than a hobble and a wobble, though many of the spiders were close behind. Every "
barn was stuffed. 'The  Northfarthing barley  was so fine  that the beer  of 
"the Rock, hearing the  rumour of dismay, wavered and looked back.  And then, "
""
"gate. Behind  on the upper  steps knelt Legolas. His bow  was  bent, but one  "
break 
hidden  root.  Then  Bilbo  took  the  opportunity  of  scrambling  up  the  side  of  his 
green slopes rising to bare ridges  that ran in a line straight  towards the 
"     'And  I,' said Legolas,  'will take all the arrows that I can find, for  "
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get 
"than a furlong off, I guess. ' "
"or whether it was but his words  of the Lady Jowyn that  wrought on them, as "
Rivendell  there was memory of  ancient things; in Lurien the ancient things 
"""Don't  start  the  argument  all  over-again.  Bill,""  he  said,  ""or  it  will  take  all "
     Frodo gazed  in   wonder at this marvellous  gift  that  he  had so long 
"rode away amid songs of farewell and good speed, with their hearts ready for more "
get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.' 
"for another  day, nor any message sent to Lugb®rz either: owing to the Great "
"rustle  of leaf,  nor  their own breath could  be heard; the very beating of "
"other,  and  counted  them,  they  never  found  or  counted  the  hobbit.  Nor  did  they "
####-<h4>Chapter 8 </h4> <br>
they charged and were hurled back. 
"Oralla Batalle,4041597617426315,28-05-1994
"
"Elga Waterhowse,4041376612339,25-07-1982
"
"broad  bright heads. Two  had great bows,  almost of their  own height,  and  "
they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze. 
teeth bit into his shoulder. All he could do was to butt his hard round head 
"Bombur, of course: he was asleep). "
Durin's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our  long  law. May 
"####-maybe, or listening to the rustling of  the wind, and then  suddenly you find "
"his stern mind was  overthrown. Grief maybe had wrought it, and  remorse. He "
Stair  beside  the falls  of  Rauros. But always  their  thoughts  and words 
     What brought they from the foundered land  
"turning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbing "
"clustered in the doorway. His broad flat  face was swart, his eyes were like "
 
"them  that  they  were  also  parchingly  thirsty,  without  doing  anything  to  relieve "
"starting early,  and  slipping away quietly! We might as  well have  blown a  "
heart and a great king and kept his oaths; and he rose out of the shadows to 
"lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.' "
"green  floor  ran on into the wood, and formed a  wide  space like  a  hall, "
"from behind. Before he had  time  to  slip on his  ring, he  stumbled  forward  into  the "
"finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You might still "
to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most part it was covered 
     Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.' 
and  quiet;  and  before Bilbo  understood what  had  happened  he was  trotting  along 
"stone that was brought, it was said, from N®menor by Isildur; and it was set "
"####-     The night is getting old,' said Aragorn. ""The dawn is not far off.' "
"Clio Ginty,4229733340179,10-05-2000
"
more 
chat I've  had  in  a month of  Mondays. And  I'll not deny that I'll  sleep 
"the  fell thing you name,  the  Balrog  -- even  though he was the  last  to "
"     I came singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. "
a 
"the edge, and they did not notice that for several miles they had been going "
overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.' 
"""What's  that  got  to  do  with  it?  I  have  had  enough  to  do  with  washing  up  for "
"least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago. It  was the Lord of the City "
""
"     `There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled -zvram! ' said  Gimli sadly.  `I  "
"     'Well, in the early night  we crept  down a  long ravine into the upper  "
"by  Balin's tomb  with his head bowed.  Boromir hauled the eastern  door to,  "
"great power, Barad-dyr, the Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed "
"in mail beneath,  and girt  with a  long sword, great-hilted in a sheath  of "
have concealed them there. 
"     He  went off at dawn.  'I may be back any day,'  he  said. 'At the very "
"sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay a sea of mist, "
"Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had  at least been "
"     'The sign has been given,'  said Aragorn, 'and the day is not far off.' "
"together -and  it has  never changed since  he  died, a century ago.  And Old "
"will lie until the end of time,' he thought. 'I don't  know why I did it. If "
"know where they were taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news "
"     'The winged Shadow?' said Thjoden. 'We saw it also, but that was in the "
"an errand most urgent, and with the first light of morning we must go.' "
"     'He will not wake again,' said Denethor. 'Battle is vain. Why should we "
we'll take fifty  of you  to the Lockholes for  a year. Get in!  The Boss is 
"ale,  put  down his mug with a sigh:  'Ah! that was  proper fourteen-twenty, "
Galadhrim where dwell  the Lord Celeborn  and Galadriel  the Lady of Lurien. 
"     `No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that  bred them can only mock, "
     `Not even to see fair Lothlurien? '  said Haldir.  'The world is indeed 
"guessed,  when  there  came  from high above a dreadful  choking shriek.  He "
like a small piece of black stone that had toppled off as he passed. 
mustering  of  men;  and he drew  plans  for  great alliances  and  glorious 
"     'Oh, that won't do!' said Bilbo. `Books ought to have good endings. How "
"arriving  in  Rivendell, there  was a long  silence, broken only by the soft  "
"dreadful feeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the "
that worse yet lay in the dregs? As now indeed I find. Would it were not so!  
"which you do not understand. But maybe. if you become  a king, you Will find "
"Orella Measham,4017953804643388,01-11-1984
"
and an index of the names of persons and places. This index is in  intention 
"Symon Algar,4377702503184,21-10-1997
"
"     `But you won't send him off alone surely, Mast er?' cried Sam, unable to "
The Clouds Burst 
"dense  black  shadow  ahead  of  him  black  even  for  that  forest,  like  a  patch  of "
"peace:  Minas  Anor again as of old, full of light, high and fair, beautiful "
     The  song  ended.  'These  are High  Elves!  They  spoke  the  name  of 
"suddenly  right  into  an  open  space, where  the  light,  after  all  that  time  in  the  dark, "
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would  prevent them from crossing as 
end of the Greenway: on the North Downs or by Lake Evendim.' 
"####-enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you can; and hold it to the last in "
black wall. 
"There were many people there, elvish-looking folk, all dressed in green and brown "
"     'I think,'  answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as  far as "
     At last Beregond spoke with an effort. 'They have come!' he said. 'Take 
"here, Gandalf, even now we have only got yourself and ten dwarves and the hobbit "
felt uncomfortable. And the gloom began to weigh on his spirits.  
lower end of the hall. Pressing forward before the Master's table they cried: 
and he is about to open his full game.  And pawns are likely to see  as much  
but I'll see what I can  do for you. We don't often get a party out  of  the 
Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly to be 
"####-Their  guide brought them from  the doors  of  the hall, and  then  led them "
"the  other side. But He likes 'em;  they're His favourites nowadays, so it's "
"unlocked the door, and  silently it  swung  back; and  they passed  through, "
"yards to a stride, if it was an inch.' "
"     'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he's closer than ever that's "
"path, and saw before them,  in the pale  clear light  of the  October sun, a  "
"land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out, you'll see the Fiery Mountain "
""
""
"He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning br ightly. His "
"and treeless, on the  further side. Beyond that they came again to a belt of "
word  that I do not  desire to keep it.  Will you not at least  let me  make 
"Larry McQueen,4976871668908,12-02-1981
"
"     'Well, good-bye!' he said. 'And don't forget  that if you hear any news "
""
"""I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,"" he answered, ""companion of Thorin, if you want to "
down  to  the  surface  of  the  lake. From  one  great  hall  shone many  lights  and  there 
"kept  in  his  own  pockets:  fishbones,  goblins'  teeth, wet  shells,  a  bit  of  bat-wing, a "
"part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.' "
"     'Well, if that isn't queerer than ever?'  he exclaimed. 'Mr. Baggins is "
"that command in his own will,  dismayed by terror though it was, and he  felt "
"####-are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and I have posted other archers, "
"and  starless night. Far into the dark quiet hours they  floated on, guiding "
"had many fingers; their hair was stiff, and their beards grey-green as moss.  "
will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way to courtesy as 
     Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes. 
little  while. But  we  await  now  a new onslaught there.  Maybe the  chief 
faded. 
"Carce Turban,4017955464457728,14-06-1981
"
"Gaffer used to say to me, and right enough. O dear, O dear! "
"Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their heads.  'Time presses, so "
-- and there he goes! Instead of being turned into  a stone himself to stand 
Sea on the wings  of  the wind: 'Out of  the Great Sea to  M iddle-earth I am 
"Jasper Gresham,4041379789274,23-05-1996
"
"the  Great Gate it went through an  arched  tunnel, piercing a  vast pier of "
     Big as a house. 
"Basilius Kasting,4410643332155,07-04-1989
"
"tears, and stooped to pick up the green shield that Jowyn had given him; and "
"of Bor omir, of the dreadful change that the  lure of the Ring had  worked in "
     `But  in the  wearing of the  swift years  of Middle-earth the line  of 
north to Rohan; and the more glad are we for these tidings  of  victory that 
"does not  tell poor  Smjagol. He says: Smjagol, take me to  the Gate  -- and "
"would  cringe and  flinch,  if  they stepped  near  him or  made any  sudden "
"said Pippin, 'and that we could speak to them from far away!' "
"should have heard him."" "
####-the last; naught has been heard of it since Thrur  perished in Moria. Indeed 
"heads, it  filled all  their sight, looming vast before them: a huge mass of "
"dreadfully  easy  chestnut,  though  he  had  not  asked  it  in  the  usual  words.  But  it "
the new green of Spring  was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the  
"after him, and watched his progress.  "
Elven-king's halls. 
""
"branches. At  last lulled by the wind in the  boughs above,  and  the  sweet "
"Maritsa Bedborough,4041595682130960,02-04-1977
"
     One  evening Frodo and Sam were walking  together in the cool twilight.  
truth about  the vanishing did not  lessen  their opinion of Bilbo at all;  for  they saw 
     Frodo found himself  walking with  Gandalf. `This  is the Hall of Fire' 
"Fowler Keynd,4041372827447661,08-08-1993
"
Speech. 
####-birds are especially  his friends. But Saruman  has long studied the arts of 
"Laetitia Pavlasek,4017951527886,13-01-1980
"
"orc-arrows  as  a pin -cushion,  and take no serious  harm.  They  cannot  be "
nearby; and there like a figure carven in white he stood  in the new sun and 
enemies.' 
Ugl®k stepped forward to meet them. 'So you've come back?' he said. 'Thought 
     'My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up 
"the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be "
"thought was broken. He stirred and shivered, but he did not look up.  Gollum "
     In  the  afternoon the King's company prepared  to depart.  The work of 
have been none  left  there next day;  all would have been killed  except  the  few  the 
"     'We are making for  the inn here,' answered Frodo.  'We are  journeying "
"herbs.' Gollum's head peeped out of the  fern,  but  his looks  were neither  "
"matters right, and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it. "
"November  had  gone by  with the  last  shreds  of autumn, and  December was "
"Soon the passage that had been sloping down began to go up again, and after a "
     There  he wandered long in a dream of  music  that turned  into running 
"High Kindred had not yet forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that "
"be dearly glad to see you have a sleep. I'd keep watch over you; and anyway, "
"was bent  on Saruman, and I did not at once  guess the  nature of the Stone. "
"     'In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused  to explain it,' said "
the farmer. 'But I wasn't worrying about  that. You have  leave to walk over  
"     'Well,  that sounds more hopeful, I'll  allow,' said Butterbur. 'And it "
""
marked by your given word. You must go to Edoras and seek out Thjoden in 
either side of  the  Morannon poured Orcs innumerable. The men of  the  West  
a foe beyond any  of you. I  must hold the narrow  way.  Fly! '  Aragorn and 
"veiling shadow that  some power lays upon   the  land, and  it marches slowly "
"that quite well.  There's  the  Buckland Gate, of course; but they'll let me "
"call  that  neat as neat,'  he said. 'If this nice friendliness would spread "
     At  dusk they halted  again. Now twice twelve  leagues  they had passed 
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully. 
     And the Grey Company ride from the North. 
was to prevent escape from Mordor. Though if an enemy were so rash as to try 
     'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and  was wrought in the 
"already he may know, even as I speak, that we have it here.' "
"     Ai! lauril lantar lassi s®rinen, "
""
threw it suddenly  into the middle  of a glowing corner  of the fire.  Frodo 
"less interested  in   themselves than Men are,  and  better at getting inside "
"the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long  ago? They are "
dark tonight.' 
caught the gleam  of  eyes keen and bright  from  within  the shadow  of the 
"you desire. But  you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your "
     before the dawn he went away 
"Dwayne Vedenyakin,4017953806122,15-10-1990
"
"tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for  a while, except by their spies. "
"he  was  well  guided  and  well  guarded-the  wizard  was  with  him,  and  Beorn  for "
"with a  wave of his hand he passed them,  and  sped into  the  distance, and "
darkness and fire to a new day. 
"away. It looked like  an old beggar-man, walking wearily, leaning on a rough "
"     While the  grey light lasted,  they cowered under a  black  stone  like "
"will follow me, if I lead you there? ' "
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 
"true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir  son of Denethor was High  Warden "
"so, he  could not go  far  on  the guarded road beyond:  not even  the black  "
"senseless; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and Gloin were waterlogged and seemed only half "
"silver mist;  the dew upon the  yellow leaves was glimmering, and  the woven "
"and clear and fair were those songs, and out stepped Thorin into their midst. "
deep that their feet seemed to thump along while all the trees leaned over them and 
"Ode Mulford,4583113652356872,15-06-1985
"
"behind, but  in the gloom  inside nothing  could be  seen. Strider, Sam, and "
out which those  are. The hobbit-rooms  have windows looking north and close 
"grass was so high  that it  reached above the knees of the riders, and their "
"of  their water, and eaten Sam's share of the food as well as  his own. When "
####-seen. But Denethor rose  and looked on the face  of his  son and was silent. 
"tree's roots, they curled  up  in  their cloaks and blankets, and were  soon "
"Paddy Hanmore,4041596355636,09-12-1981
"
"     'The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the "
"boat floating  on  the water, glimmering  grey,  a small  boat  of a strange "
"Frodo could not tell.  He did not feel either hungry  or tired,  only filled "
"     Treebeard  fell silent, striding along, and yet  making  hardly a sound "
"wits,' said  Pippin, opening an eye. 'Here you find us sitting on a field of "
"####-not.  But there's no  doubt about it, they're troubled about something.  The "
"which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself: "
"about  Merry, and it was  getting late.  'I  am afraid  he is  out. He  said "
the distant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time 
"other foods. It fed the will, and  it gave strength to endure, and to master  "
"folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir would have fled.' "
"He swept up  into  the air, and  immediately  two of his guards  from the rocks at "
"Elf, 'that you may come safe from war and return to  see  them again. But do "
varying slope direct-to some distant end in the blackness below.  
"escort, at the least. "
"     'What are you saying, Gandalf?' asked Pippin. "
politely. 
but gave him a swift venomous look. 
"were drowned, or were flying  south in the hope to find their own lands upon "
"to once, just before the party. But he does not really want to, yet.  I want "
"when he told them of the beautiful breeze, which they were too heavy to climb up "
     Would be the way to larn him. 
express what he felt. 
of  something  would  do  him  good  after  his  fright.  Gandalf  in  the  meantime  was 
you will hardly  reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. 
"that  he falls to haggling? And  if indeed we rated this  prisoner  so high, "
"     'Black Riders!'  muttered Pippin.  'Black  Riders  of the air! But see, "
####-written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark 
and escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear. 
"almost  say,  Saruman  as  he  should have  been. But come  now, tell me  of "
####-flickered  as  it  fled  as  if with  stinging  fire.  Behind  the  arrows  a  thousand  of  their 
night  that has  lain there  since the hills were made; and when we  desired 
"You  have  nice  manners  for  a  thief  and  a  liar,""  said  the  dragon.  ""You  seem "
the boulders or in the trackless glens  of  the Morgai. And  he  judged that 
"     Thus Gandalf softly  sang, and then suddenly  he changed.  Casting  his "
"with us tonight, if you  will.' "
"gloom behind a small company of horsemen galloped, all that was  left of the "
your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do 
Then they stand still. 
     'And what about yourself?' asked Merry. 
"dangerous wood,  that  lay  outstretched  far  to North  and  South  a  day's  ride  before "
"     `As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf. The "
"floors to meet the glistening pendants  of  the roof:  wings, ropes, curtains "
anything like this rider. I wonder  where he comes from.' 
     `Alas for  the  folly  of these  days! '  said Legolas.  'Here  all  are 
"wood in the blind shadows, down and down until they could go no further. "
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.' 
"above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom. "
the ten-fingered was beyond my means. 
"     'Legolas is right,' said Aragorn quietly. 'We may not  shoot an old man "
slowly 
Chapter 4. The Siege of Gondor 
"they might have passed,  if  they had  still had  their ponies, and beyond  that a  track "
Their gear is not after the manner of Orcs at all!' 
"fond is not the right word.  I mean he is dear to me; though he  is strange, "
"Annaliese Della Scala,4041593691936626,06-03-2001
"
and let me use the paddle! ' 
     a weary pilgrim on the road. 
"     'What's beautiful about it?' said Pippin, peering  over the edge of his "
"exceedingly, as  Gandalf intended. The lights went out. A great  smoke  went "
"pit of  evil thought. Monstrous and  abominable eyes they were, bestial  and  "
"unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.' "
"you would find Orthanc  commodious,  and  my  departure convenient. But  "
gate or in the  old tunnel! Water may come through-and it will be  foul water  
mockingly. 'For the words  of one whom my son so befriended will be  
"Dead, you have yourself walked on their  first steps. Nay. I speak no  words "
dwarves  like  Thorin  and  his  friends  think  them  foolish  (which  is  a  very  foolish 
"     He spoke cheerfully, and if  he felt any great anxiety, he did not show "
even when it is needed. Neither do  I talk  in vain. So be comforted. Sit by 
"     Whether because  of Strider's skill or for some other reason,  they saw "
With  a  spring Gollum got up  and  started  shambling off  at  a great pace. Bilbo 
"Tybalt La Padula,4017952662112,28-09-1989
"
many thongs. 
was lying  down under the hedge. `It's in  your pack all the time!'  Then he 
between Tharbad and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again. 
"in  deadly  peril, gave  to Sam  a sudden violence and strength that was far "
"     In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly "
"####-softly. 'That's what he means, is it? O  ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little "
"did not  speak,  for I was heavy with  thought, and  weary after my struggle "
"profitable too, very likely, if you ever get over it."" "
"** Look at the maps with this book, and you will see the runes there. "
"corner by themselves  upon a pile  of old  bracken.  Merry was  sleepy,  but "
"     'Yes,' answered Gandalf, 'he has gone at last.' "
"even help the  master that you love. It shall turn to his good, if it is  in "
"Fool, take it off! Take off the Ring! "
brought them under the trees.  Looking back they could see the  dark line of 
"     'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel. "
"his head swam now, when he  looked down between his dangling  toes and saw  the "
####-was clad in white; but her eyes were on fire. 
"it changed if they  moved  their eyes or if  he stirred. His  face was long, "
"they are roused, Ents can be very cautious and patient. They stood  still  as "
"awoke  them again.  The sun had  now climbed far into the  morning, and  the "
"     'Well!' Sam went on. 'Whatever they have to eat and drink, we can't get "
"Phillipp Hannam,4017954874616,02-01-1987
"
"Angelique Bohl,4017951368604,11-06-1981
"
     At  this  Gollum's fear  and  agitation became so  great that he  spoke 
slowly 
"Right  across the  floor, close  to the feet  of two  huge  pillars  a great "
"soldiers, they shuffled back towards the rear  of  the line. 'No, not at the "
"Lord of Gondor.  But I do not slay man  or beast needlessly, and  not gladly "
"     `There's going to be no fun, I tell  you,' said Shagrat.  'And he's got "
"vanished. For Isildur was marching north  along the east banks of the River,  "
"""You  all  seem  in  league!""  said  Thorin  dropping  Bilbo  on  the  top  of  the wall. "
the shadow of  the  hills  and looked west to the  Gap  of Rohan the sky was 
"'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then "
his mind off himself he listened intently to all that  he could  hear. There 
he were free. And I do not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some 
"     Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! "
foothills of the northern  range. But as they went the  most easterly of the 
 
"pools, and broad acres of sedge waving above wet and  treacherous bogs;  but "
"now leaning forward, stooped to the  ground, with a  hand to  his ear, and a  "
"     'Yes,' he  said  with  a  smile.  `I ask  leave  once again to be  your "
"kinds buzzing round their  ears, and the afternoon sun was burning  on their "
"road-side,  and  fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to  have closed "
"part as you have played-a valiant one, I doubt not. But I pray you, allow me  "
"boulders,  they  could  see  in  the wide valley  shadowed by  the Mountain's  arms  the "
"""What do you mean by it?"" said the Great Goblin turning to Thorin. ""Up to no "
""
"flashed,  and blazoned  upon  every helm  and  shield  the  ghastly  hand of "
"them! Bite  them! Gnash  them! Take  them  away  to  dark  holes  full  of  snakes,  and "
bed until he had visited Bill in his stable. 
"     `Now is the time,' he  said, `when those who wish to continue the Quest  "
the southern side  of the ridge; but the way  was much easier  than they had 
"quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret "
Halfings;  they are to be brought back ALIVE  as quickly as possible . That's 
"     'Verily,' said Gandalf, now in a loud voice,  keen and clear, 'that way "
"     `Yes, they  quarrelled, seemingly,'  said Sam. (There must  have been a  "
not too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how  he is housed. These 
passing quickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could 
"sniffed,  which seemed,  as  they had noticed before,  his  usual method  of "
     'But at this  time our chief concern  is  with Saruman. He has  claimed 
anxious. The  food would not  last  for  ever:  it was  in  fact  already beginning  to get 
"leaped  over  Gollum in the dark, and fled away down the passage, pursued by "
"several horsemen fall; but their line held on up  the hill  and  over it, and "
"though he hated the news, he was greedy to have it; and  I saw that he heard "
"     'Beyond  the eyes of the Dwarves are  such  foretellings,'  said Gimli. "
"     for the Realm of Sauron is ended for ever, "
Rivendell. 
"     'All this about the  Orcs of Barad-dyr, Lugb®rz as  they call it, makes "
backs.  At last they  came suddenly into a thin shade;  great grey  branches 
has  its  drawbacks  after  all.  Otherwise  I  suppose  I  might  have  spent  a  warm  and 
one could hide a bit  of one's own  when the ruffians  went  round gathering 
"Channa Tranckle,4041594629038113,04-11-1985
"
     `Ropes indeed! ' answered an Elf  from the  boats.  'Never  travel  far 
"Nori,  On,  Oin,  and  Gloin  were  more  comfortable  in  a  huge  pine  with  regular "
"'None are welcome here in days of war but our  own folk, and those that come "
     'How long have you  known this?'  asked Frodo  at length. 'And how much 
too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.' 
     'So you  have yet another of these imps  with you!' he cried. 'What use 
forward he stooped his proud head and nuzzled his great nostrils against the 
"     Together the  Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk that saw "
"the  goblins  from  the  mountain-slopes,  casting  them  over  precipices,  or  driving "
"Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth "
     'That is good!' said Bergil. 'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the 
     through dragon-lair and hidden door 
"mountains. You  see, though  still  bound  by desire of it, the Ring was  no "
"are  now  a  good  deal  further east than I ever meant to come with you, for after all "
"     'He has not,' said Merry. 'But Ents on ly drink, and drink is not enough "
"Heinrick Rosier,4041377161648329,12-06-1990
"
Legolas and  I  played a game that I won only  by a single orc. Come and see 
"was  sitting,  black  in  the moonlight,  on  the  top  of  a  lonely  pinnacle  of  rock  at  the "
it did not appease Faramir. 
     The only  part that  seemed really to rouse him and  hold his attention 
"Free Doyley,4041375865140833,28-12-1983
"
"though we leave a host of foes behind, what matter? If the Stone-city falls, "
of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight. 
     'Here. In the village. I  stayed indoors for  an  hour. Then as you did 
"     `You needn't,' said Bilbo. `As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except "
texture of a tree's skin and of the life within  it. He  felt  a  delight in 
"Pearce Cadwell,4041374868586,28-11-1987
"
"on the wind: dromunds, and  ships  of great draught with many oars, and with "
"strong again.  Then the Nine Riders issued forth from  the  gates of horror, "
"     The hobbits  sat  down  again, but  they said nothing to one another of "
"give for  it, such  as he gave  of  old.  And he  asked urgently  concerning "
But th ink of the last part of that  business  with Saruman! Remember Saruman 
Suddenly up came Gollum and whispered and hissed: 
"themselves  do not see the  world of light as we  do,  but our  shapes  cast  "
"     Gollum  went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him, none too "
     'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped.' 
moving. It  was  crawling. It  put out  a  claw and clutched the  bundle. It 
"back  into their hearts: the  noise of  hoofs behind them. They looked back, "
shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up  towards the Redhorn Gate. 
"his old  brow was wrinkled and  knotted.  At  last he  looked up, and Pippin "
piece cast miles into the plain by some giant among giants. 
"     'Concerning  this  thing,  my  lords, you now  all know enough for  the "
"throated  roar. With  cries  of  ""Moria!""  and  ""Dain,  Dain!""  the  dwarves  of  the  Iron "
"Glamdring  the  Foe-hammer,  if  you  remember.  The  goblins  just  called  it  Beater, "
the stream the green fields of Rohan fading  into distant grey.  Curtains of 
"or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand  - and warn "
"not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this "
     `I felt that  something horrible was near from  the moment that my foot 
sides of Ephel D®ath; beyond his sight it journeyed on  into the narrow land 
"     The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its blade "
Aragorn 
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here 
"Seek the sunlight and the day,  "
####-Chambers of Fire. Out from the Dark Tower's huge western gate it came over a  
"Sylvester Trelease,4017959478619406,24-05-1999
"
"     'Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie buried, or  "
"share, and turned from the light that lay on the lands outside and plunged into the "
     Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake. smelling and touching the 
And ever so our foes shall fall! 
     'But  your  people  must  not be  both  unarmed and shepherdless'  said 
begin with you.' 
"Pauline Dabernott,4041595492771755,27-04-1982
"
greater than you Shire-folk know  -  as a rule you can only see his jokes and 
by bit-a matter of a hundred years or so – you could not get it very far? Not much 
"for my weight."" Luckily for him that was not true, as you will see. "
""
The Gathering of the Clouds 
"upon Frodo,  bereft of  his Phial, running heedless up the path, unaware yet "
"right, and  first one eye and then the other opened a slit. The hobbits made "
"tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a  "
"Marcello Martynka,4041599007721,27-06-1998
"
"quite small, just  a  dinner  for himself  and his four helpers; but  he was "
"came summoning him, the king's esquire, to wait at the king's board. "
     `Rewards!'  said Frodo.  'I can't imagine a more severe punishment. You  
"     Then to the wonder of many Aragorn did not put the crown upon his head, "
"Tome Tooley,4041598281384,24-11-1982
"
"drew close  to  it and sat together,  shrouding  the light with their hooded "
beating of his wings. 
in. It was in this way that he learned where Gandalf had been to; for he overheard 
hunting dragon. 
"sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of  grey  limestone-boulders,  "
"     `What about me?  ' said  Frodo. 'I am  alive,  and whole I think. I  am "
no doubt that Bilbo knew quite  well.  It was indeed a kingly gift. But  now 
them the better. Night is at hand! ' 
Behind them walked Legolas and  Gimli. But Merry had eyes only for  
####-returning.' 
as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already there.' 
""
"broken  rock, and broad fissures ran out from them in all directions. It was "
"     'These  black  men,' said  the landlord lowering  his  voice.  'They're "
would learn of you also.  For  never before have  we seen a halfling in this 
  It  was  at  this  point  that  Bilbo  stopped.  Going  on  from  there  was  the  bravest 
complete silence for a long time. 
you have endured  perils  and seen marvels that few of our  greybeards could 
"stretching beyond the eastward side of  Amon Don, and masking a great gap in "
in June 
"Clayton Husthwaite,4017959722703,11-02-1979
"
realized. 
""
"'Don't you know my name yet? That's the only  answer. Tell me,  who are you, "
twenty-fourth. It ought to  be  the  twenty-first. We  must have reached the 
"     O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves' laughter!'  "
"and nibbling at  their favourite  dainties, and their fears  were forgotten. "
wall. Ever and again  the lightning  tore aside the darkness.  Then the Orcs 
what are you?' 
"malice was now bent, as the Power moved to strike its deadly blow; but Frodo "
"Teddie Chalfant,4336057515599048,11-04-1993
"
"Dallas Dauncey,4587711089880,17-03-1994
"
Queer Lodgings 
"doubtless undesigned."" "
"tasty morsel  it'd make  us,  gollum!"" And when  he  said gollum he made a horrible "
in their own tongue. 
     Gandalf it was that  last spoke  to Faramir ere he  rode east. 'Do  not 
"     The  last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took  him, was a dark glimpse "
again. 
"beast, as  I  said  when  I  first  set eyes  on  him.  Well, come in!  Make "
""
""
"horns in the host were lifted up in music, and the  blowing  of the horns of "
     The  hobbits gazed  at Strider. It seemed  that he  was  learned in old 
"fashion, but there are too few here, too few.' "
"""Half  a  moment!""  cried  Bilbo,  who  was  still  thinking  uncomfortably  about "
things  less good in  the Southfarthing than you  would like. Long  may your  
"came,  crying out that the King of the Dead was upon them. Only Angbor, Lord "
     'Of N®menor?' said Jowyn. 
not love me?' 
"could now  be seen grey  and glittering, coming  out of the  north-west, and "
"Antin Fendt,4017953852477366,17-03-1990
"
"     I  endured  him  as long  as  I could,  but  the truth  was desperately "
"helpful  nor friendly.  `A few  bay-leaves, some  thyme and sage, will do  -- "
the earth. 
"force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking  the Ring, force  is "
"     'Many  things,'  said  Legolas. 'It is a great company on foot;  but  I "
"try, not yet anyway.' "
there were  wars and  growing  fear.  Orcs were  multiplying  again  in  the  
"to their left, southward, against a sky that was turning grey, the peaks and "
"     Even  as the old wizard  spoke,  the great horse  came striding up  the "
sent  down  the  river  to  reward  us?  Dragon-fire  and  ruin!  From  whom  should we 
"and though  all round it  the  snow  hissed, and pools of  slush crept under  "
stood  up and cried:  'O great glory and  splendour! And all my wishes  have  
"####-taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank, where there was a  "
"Effie O'Sheilds,4041593025190,06-07-1984
"
"are terrified when  they draw  near, even  the elf-horse of  Glorfindel. The "
 
     In windy fields now bright and clear 
"     'Yes, even as you see us.' "
then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night. 
was most terrifying. But the eyes that he liked the least were horrible pale bulbous 
"and Hobbits are not mentioned at  all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits  had, in "
"assailed them, and they made the Last Alliance of  Elves  and  Men,  and the "
"steeply  still,  and  it was becoming  increasingly stony.  The  light  grew "
"ever been in lovely Lugb®rz, so he may  like to know what to expect. This is "
"recent years; for he  did not strike the stream where he  looked to  find it, "
"fires brought no light to the hillock. The riders were not, however, content "
before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already the fog was 
"     The four younger  hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the party "
"     'Nazgyl, Nazgyl,' said Grishnbkh, shivering and licking his lips, as if "
 
"wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly. "
it.' 
"     Then Gandalf went  out in haste, and already  the fire  in  the sky was "
"had been driven back into the  Deep. There came  Gamling  the Old, and Jomer  "
"Mohammed Bockmann,4017957334428,19-09-1995
"
"from  his  wand  like  lightning,  as  he  got  ready  to  spring  down  from  on  high  right "
     'Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and sing a ll day 
"Winnifred Yarn,4041591241476,27-06-1985
"
"is said that if it be blown at need anywhere within the bounds of Gondor, as "
 
forget  the  dark  forest-path  that  lay  in  front.  But  in  the  evening  when  the  dusk 
"now remember them: Only I hear the stones  lament them: deep they delved us, "
"over him,  cursing  their  ill  luck,  and Bombur's  clumsiness,  and  lamenting  the  loss "
"     'I think you look fine, Sam,'  she  said. 'Go on now! But  take care of "
"to bring  us to Mount Doom, that is  all we can do. More than I can, I begin "
"Ori,  and  Oin  and  Gloin,  and  Bifur  and  Bofur  and  Bombur-or  to  Bilbo.  Yet  a "
"the  woods gathered  again,  blue  and grey under  the  sullen  evening, and "
"     For Anduin, from the bend at  the Harlond, so flowed that from the City "
"####-     The voice of Legolas faltered, and the  song ceased. 'I cannot sing any "
"sunlight glimmered, green and gold. All the  air was full of a sweet mingled  "
answered Gildor. 'Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are deadly. Ask no 
"the pony's head, and spoke  in  a  low voice. `Go with  words  of  guard and "
"     'A  present from Smjagol,' said Sam: `a brace o' young coneys; though I "
"     'Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it: "
till morning. 
How they should enter it at the last  Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could 
and far ahead  and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out of 
"whether  he  still lives  and where,  and you  shall  have great  reward and "
"heard  of  such  things,  of  course,  in old old  tales; but  it was hard  to believe  that he "
green light; and  the blending of the two lights lit the bay; as  if the sun 
"""Must we go any further?"" asked Bilbo, when it was so dark that he could only "
"said, trying to sound as cheerful  as he had when  he drew back the curtains "
"pale  white  light. He  hurried after  them,  past rows of men  sleeping  on "
those that watched felt that some great struggle was going on. For Aragorn's 
"very punctual as a rule, and he seldom failed to wake  up in t ime  for them. "
"Elves,  sir! I  would dearly love  to see  them. Cou ldn't you take  me to see "
table); and he went out boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife 
"flat stones of Ravenhill, and no one was near. A cloudless day, but cold, was broad "
"beaten  ash.  Frodo clambered on  to  it,  and  then  moved  as  if by  some "
"they stood (mighty glad of the change) steaming, and champing in their nosebags. "
"the  ill  will of Caradhras. He  does not love Elves and  Dwarves, and  that "
bent  all  his will to draw his breath and to make  his legs keep going; and 
"leaped up on to the faggots, and raising the sick man lightly he sprang down "
"Elias Dwire,4041377023655306,18-04-1987
"
"have more needs than you expect."" "
"magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton. "
"     'It is good!' said  Merry. 'My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf! There "
"while, ere we return  over the Great Sea.  But some  of  our kinsfolk  dwell "
"if  he goes east,  then all need not go  with him; nor  do I think that  all "
long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head 
"Mountains down to  the River, and He holds the bridges now. He thinks no one "
every minute is a weariness. And if he often  uses the Ring  to make himself 
"     The wine was brought, and then  Anborn came carrying Gollum. He "
"""I  see  they  have  begun  to  arrive  already,""  he  said  when  he  caught  sight  of "
"us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we're so lonely, gollum. "
"and he said  to me--' And then again she was obliged to silence, for Faramir "
"####-     And light of stars was in her hair, "
"     'You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and  thinking,' said Sam. "
"Yoshiko Kingcott,4041590095501,16-09-1985
"
"     There was nothing for Frodo to do but to  fall in with this request, or  "
Rangers.  Legolas  and Gimli  mounted.  Aragorn  sprang upon  Roheryn.  
"by night, and he brought him to the  southern feet  of Mount Mindolluin; and "
     'Have Orcs been there?' asked Aragorn. 
deal for friends in a tight comer.  
"short fat man with a bald head and a red  face. He had a white apron on, and "
should  be  amended  with  a  share  of  it.  The  price  of  the  goods  and  the  assistance 
has declared:  to hide  the Ring  for ever;  or to  unmake it.  But both are 
"war which it was my task to  conduct, or at least to report, 1 forced myself "
fair house of Elrond.' 
they are  old and strong. And She that  walked in the darkness had heard the 
"them, "
"Lindi Sarsfield,4017958078812080,14-05-1996
"
"the same place, and he could not ride away from his charge, were he weary of "
"if you don't keep your feet,  there is no knowing where  you might  be swept  "
someone with intelligence in the party.' 
     Presently the captain of the Guard thrust aside the curtain. 'A  man is 
"himself the dragon's weak spot; and that was just as well, for no one ever did. But "
"was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest,  and "
before. His reply to all inquiries  was simply this: 'Mr. Bilbo  Baggins has 
"hills. But the wind had shifted to the north, and already the storm that had "
""
"fear of its revealing  light.  Aiya Edrendil Elenion Ancalima! he cried, and "
"     Sam frowned. If he could have  bored holes in Gollum  with his eyes, he "
""
as  I promised. I promise aga in.  But  not now. You are not safe yet. I will  
"without a glance of longing, handed the marvellous stone to Bard, and he held it in "
passed  into the  outer  court  upon the Rock.  As they  ran they gathered a  
"took out his morning  letters, and begin  to  read, pretending  to  take no more notice "
return. 
"got  what we  grow ourselves,  and  that's not enough. There's none to be had "
"sharp, remote, white as  the teeth of ghosts, the peaks of Ered Nimrais, the "
could not see; and such a weight  did it  become that it was a burden to him 
"on my jack-in-the-boxes!"" "
""
"straight  for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches "
Southerner at Bree: only he was not  so obviously orc-like as  most of these 
"     'Maybe there is no right choice,' said Gimli. "
advanced. 
it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.' 
to  end  in  disaster  than  a  bold  frontal  attack.  All  the  while  they  talked  the  thrush 
"thought  of his Ring. He hardly dared  to breathe,  and yet the desire to get "
     Merry  and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass 
"Mandie Elan,4041377398600291,17-02-1993
"
daughter. 
the  gate  of  a  little-known  pathway  through  Mirkwood  that  led  almost  straight 
"Tyrus Stollen,4693513740943192,11-05-1990
"
They  each  shouldered  the  heavy  pack  and  the  water-skin  which  was  their 
"along  the water's edge for some distance, until they  found a small shallow "
"     'It has everything to do with  it,' said Gandalf. 'You do  not know the "
"     Sam plodded on.  He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits "
"long ago and turned it into an evil place: Minas Morgul, it has become. "
probably. We did a lot of shouting  away back there; and we were talking far 
"     `Well, you put  his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had  more "
"Candi Swalwel,4017952482198,08-01-1983
"
"white face, her hand clenched as she turned and gazed out of his window that "
vultures that expect their fill of doomed men's flesh. Out of sight and shot 
"sterner and wiser. 'I remember that Boromir bore a horn,' he said at last. "
"     'Have  hope!' said Boromir. 'I am weary, but I still have some strength "
"horse, if  horse it was;  for it was huge  and hideous,  and its face was  a  "
Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision 
Mountains are  drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the  Thrihyrne peaks 
The 
captains judged that because of the threat in the South their force  was too 
"     Frodo  and  Sam, horror -stricken, began slowly to back away,  their own "
"more musical and various.  The calls  were answered; and turning  again, the  "
 
"     'I left a  fool,' snarled Grishnbkh. 'But there were some stout fellows "
"his hands, and cried:  'Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!' He drew "
oncoming of winter. 
"had  for this hour,  if indeed he had any. Most  likely it seems that if  he "
"stream, over  bubbling  waterfalls,  over  pebbles and worn rocks, and among "
before  long  came  to  a  deep  dell sheltered among  the rocks;  there  they rested for a 
"when Smjagol was young, when I was young  before the Precious came. It was "
North Kingdom were falling far and  wide into waste. There was  room and  to 
"     'The clothes that you wore on your way  to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Even "
clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved 
"birthday.  For it  is, of  course, also the birthday of my  heir and nephew,  "
"make much difference,"" growled Beorn. "
said Frodo. 'But I knew in my heart  that he  really  meant to go. He always 
 
""
"     Then Cnrdan led  them to the Havens, and there  was a white ship lying, "
what it was when Celeborn was young. Still: 
"####-eyes. The mithril coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would find "
seen  on earth again save in memory.' 
"watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked "
"     Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he came "
"all, I fancy I  could put a name on the creature,  at a guess. A nasty name. "
"Elyssa Vargas,4041375319231089,22-05-1975
"
"remained fixed, staring out towards the  dark line and the flickering flame. "
     After  the feast (more or less) came the  Speech. Most of  the  company 
followed but they  did not ride upon it;  for the ground beside it  was firm 
tumbled slopes and glens of the Morgai. With a desperate spurt Frodo and Sam 
"By some curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the world, when "
Chapter 7. In the House of Tom Bombadil 
Roads go ever ever on 
     'Good!' said  Gandalf. 'That is what I  hoped. Now I can go and turn to 
to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to say this:  
and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows. 
 
"they would have greeted him with kind words; but now they stood silent, each "
     Gandalf stood  at Frodo's side and  looked out under his hand. `We have 
"just  see  Thorin's  beard  wagging  beside  him,  and  so  quiet  that  he  could  hear  the "
the grace of the Steward of the City.' And she did him a courtesy and walked 
"Reynolds Fulham,4041379123649,08-03-1997
"
If you can do it quietly.' 
"seemed and yet in  the fl ower of manhood; and wisdom sat upon his brow,  and "
"     `I might,' said Frodo, `and I might say ""luggage with eyes"".  You shall "
from 
the  further bank we can rest. and  the sound of the falling water may bring 
"Elianore Aylmer,4041595014465,28-12-1976
"
"     'No!'  said  Aragorn,  taking his hand and kissing  his brow. 'You have "
he know the hour? And  who can now hold  the fords when the King of the 
     'How long is that going to take us? ' asked Frodo. 
     'Where can I find him?' 
     'Where is Shadowfax?' said Gandalf.  
"the  coming  of  new  hope,  and  they  pursued  them  closely,  and  prevented  most  of "
"     'He  bore  it? ' said Faramir, breathing sharply in  his wonder.  `This "
"     `Well, I should just lik e to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo. "
"themselves across the Great River yet, not too soon. They're for the War -and "
marching Orcs  tramped  its  ugly slot;  the sweet  grass of  Rohan had been 
"seemed  plain  that  torches  and  fires were  burning  under  the  trees, but a good way "
"settled, Mr. Frodo.' "
"the sea -kings of old, he stood  above all that were near; ancient of days he "
"hurry, and was already talking  at a great  pace,  before they passed out of "
no more  can be sent so far. But I will not yield the River and the Pelennor  
"him,  ever  growing.  Swiftly it  drew  near,  and  suddenly the  boats shot "
"astonished at getting answers to  so  many questions, and wondering how long "
Actually it was some days before Bilbo really set out. 
land was green: in the wet meads and along  the grassy borders of the stream 
"Aragorn,  standing up. He cast  his sword upon  the  table  that stood before "
"     `So  do I,' said Sam. `And nothing will ever  be all  right  where that "
such  sickness as east of  the Sea mortal men  were subject to. Save old age 
to  the  grass-land  beyond  the  stream.  There  was  a  little  cave  (a  wholesome  one 
"not, perhaps not.' "
"counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if  one "
"has come first, from over  the River by way of Andros, it is said.  They are "
"Dirk Matts,4393979646994,01-12-1982
"
Chapter 1. The Taming of Smjagol 
cluster of flowers whose white petals shone like the sunlit snow.  
that he did not fully understand. 'Where is Aragorn?' he asked. 
"own warm fireside with the lamp shining!"" He often wished, too, that he could get "
"they never  caught him. The wood was full of  the  rumour  of  him, dreadful "
"An Orc stooped over him, and flung him some bread  and a strip of raw  dried "
"look after all these dwarves for me,"" he laughed. "
look and see what you may. Do not touch the water! ' 
once  or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side  put out  his  arm  and 
doubt: 
"""What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?"" asked Bilbo suddenly.  "
"Daven Hordle,4017957654551,13-08-1978
"
"""What  have  we  done,  O  king?""  said  Balin,  who  was  the  eldest  left.  ""Is  it  a "
hard;  and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of 
of------' 
"     Then  suddenly  one day, for he had  been too busy for  weeks to give a  "
"Saloma Jess,4017950873239593,01-02-1996
"
"There were no wolves living near Mr. Baggins' hole at home, but he knew that "
unslinging his pack he laid  it on the floor. He drew Sting from its sheath. 
-- if they asks nicely.' 
"against him  in Mordor,  and more  still being gathered, he  saw  that which "
the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.' 
the  Ring  and put it  on again. Immediately he felt the great burden of its 
round for miles and  miles. Very  lucky  you  came  this way. Very lucky you 
"Annora Aslet,4017955982418,23-09-1996
"
while  Frodo  stood  before him.  It looked strangely  like the  trial  of a  
time.' 
####-candles and the fire was mended. Mrs. Maggot  hustled in and out. One or two 
sound of her voice in the cool clear air: 
slipped.' 
were cracked. 
     Chapter 3   Mount Doom   
"     'Ill?' cried Denethor,  and his eyes flashed suddenly. 'Why do you ask? "
"was the sound  of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the "
"leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages  with his "
"me a little longer, Mr. Frodo. I must go  and see what  I can find. You stay "
"we do so,  then you will come also to a last  stand, either here or wherever  "
"the dais, upon the lowest step which was broad and deep, there  was  a stone "
"long  the place was packed with  people who had no business there, but could "
"     Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into  the  line beside Treebeard. The "
"     Under  the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the road "
"for which you would yield any of your gold?"" "
trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used.  It was a path made 
"voice  of Amroth comes up from the sea; for  Nimrodel flows into Silverlode, "
"treasure well. There was,  of  course,  no  longer  any  question of dividing  the hoard "
to his neck before  he got too far away for me to see him. The last I saw of 
weather. The air grew  warm and very still under the great moist clouds that 
"name. There was no gleam  of stone  or gold, nor any fair thing in all their "
"Emogene Canny,4041590820503228,14-01-1997
"
"halt here. The  enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I  fear that the "
     The  hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies  of all 
"hundreds  of miles away. And drinking wine out of a  golden cup, I shouldn't "
"     'Lean on me, Merry lad!' said Pippin. 'Come now! Foot by foot. It's not "
     'Then why  has Aragorn  gone that  way?'  asked Merry. 'Don't you  know 
"     'There were rowan-trees in my home,'  said Bregalad,  softly and sadly, "
"creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before "
"     `That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,' said Boromir. "
"moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood . They had been locked up as if "
"Tiffanie Ovanesian,4017957708763077,03-09-1981
"
"Taryn Lippiello,4041373896112400,06-10-1994
"
"was  out-  lined,  and  slowly  without  a  sound  swung  inwards.  It  seemed  as  if "
"It was a weary journey, and a quiet and stealthy one. There was no laughter or "
"spread to the others. The bark caught fire, the lower branches cracked. "
""
golden belt was given to him in Lothlurien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was 
"Jeramie Kedge,4810963246309,15-02-1979
"
"     Little  Elanor  was nearly six months  old, and 1421  had passed to its "
"     'What about the smelling, sir?' said Sam. 'And the Gaffer said he was a  "
monument to the dark labour of its slaves that should  endure when all their 
     There was silence. At last Elrond spoke again. 
"fallen  in  the  river,  and  they  had  turned  aside  for  their  nasty  adventure with  Tom "
the ground. He  gave a cry of  dismay and  fear.  Two great trolls appeared; 
"     They  spoke of many things, old  and new,  and Frodo questioned  Gildor  "
"     He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I  come, I "
""
shouted.  His  enormous voice  rose above  all the din.  There  was  a  dead 
"waistcoat,  and  a   bottle  of  ointment  for  creaking  joints.  Old  Rory "
"     Hm, hm, hm. "
was forgetting; and anyway it is  wearisome listening to a speech you do not 
"Dotty Brunon,4041595447111,21-07-1984
"
"Aluino Talton,4017952076719,23-01-1981
"
"     'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,' answered Merry gravely 'He  has "
     Thjoden was indeed glad of the news. 'It  is well!' he said.  'If these 
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders. 
"look came into his  face. 'You came with  him? That is news indeed, if it be "
"used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!' "
still the Enemy made no sign. 
     'Come!' said  Gandalf.  'We  are needed. There is much that you can yet 
"peril, but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown and victory.  I "
"     The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could  "
"""Go on, whistle again! I am in for a party, it seems, and one or two more won't "
either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering. 
"and  plates  and  spoons  and  things  piled  up  on  big  trays,  he  was  getting  very  hot, "
"     They clothed him then in elven-white, "
"Adi Knight,4331601234623,26-10-1996
"
"some at a distance, already -they saw you  at any rate, and reported that you  "
After a moment he looked up with relief.  
""
"     `That  animal can nearly talk,' he said, `and  would talk, if he stayed "
that  now  fell  from  the  roof  made  the  air  too  thick  for  even  their  eyes  to  see 
"     He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in  a clear cold voice.  'Saruman, "
and brave as they had seemed to Merry the night before. Dull they seemed and 
"got.   But  they've   taken  Faramir's  food,  and  they've  slashed  up  my "
needed not the fell voice of  the messenger to  warn us that his  words held 
"Fidela Mooney,4781829019627107,26-06-1992
"
####-now the  Steward of this Realm! Behold! one has come  to  claim the kingship 
equal of Lord Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to possess a waistcoat 
"the stars are, and the Moon!' "
first faint presage of Spring. A  tear sprang in her  eye  and fell down her  
"still seemed very incomplete). or scraps of his verses, or  would take notes "
"It had a front on  the Road, and two wings running  back on land partly  cut "
"grey tree-stems.  `Farewell,' he said. It seemed to him  tha t he would never  "
"at  hand,  which  he does  not  see, busy  with his fiery  thoughts. He  has "
"slanted  upwards and, far  above,  a small square patch of blue sky could be "
"     he said  in a commanding voice.  The silver lines faded, but the  blank  "
"     'If you understand  it,  then  be  content,' returned  Denethor. 'Pride "
to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been  scooped in the 
"his beard went  stiff and straight like bristling wire, `we must keep up our "
It  turned  out  a  good  thing  that  night  that  they  had  brought  little  Bilbo  with 
the other turning away to the left. This they  followed. It wound its way up 
"     Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously tough. "
wait  some  time  before  Smaug  relaxed  his  watch  sufficiently  for  them  to dare  the 
"Arin Piotr,4017952850782,25-10-1996
"
name.  Gandalf  I know too  well to  have much  hope that  he seeks help  or  
the  sudden  gleam  in  the  gloom  Bilbo  looked  round. He  gave  a  great  cry:  he  had 
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.' 
"quicker than the heron's  wings.  The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some "
"Katherina Matterdace,4041373409788,03-08-1977
"
So  you  see Bilbo  had  come  in  the  end  by  the  only  road  that was  any  good.  It 
"forced  to  go round-about, far out  of  the direct way.  How much  are  you  "
took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest  to the brink; then 
"Thorpe Ridge,4041375785631853,13-10-1981
"
Bagginses  or  the Boffins.  Outside the  Farthings  were the  East and West 
"twilight,  and leered down at them  from the high bank and the edges of  the "
"     'I will judge that when I see,' said Aragorn.  'One thing also is short "
"Artur Moreinis,4017959102939964,30-06-1991
"
"those  that we  put out  far afield  will  be per ilous, if he wins across in "
     'What do you mean?' said Pippin. 'What is true?' 
 
the  splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise 
"At the same  moment they  became aware that  the hedges on  both sides,  just "
"gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and "
"     'There remain  two more  to  be  found,'  said  Elrond.  ""These  I will "
"     Before long, washed and  refreshed,  the  hobbits  were  seated  at the "
"through the  gap, they had only lo keep on in  anything like a straight line "
"divided Isengard  and Mordor, then  they could  fight  while we watched  and "
back up the  wooded slopes on to the  top of a shoulder of  the  hills  that 
"     'But the mountains  are ahead of us,' said Pippin. `We must have turned "
me.' 
""
had not yet reached  the  end  of Book  One. In spite of the darkness of the 
""
""
and broke  it on his  knee.  Casting the pieces into  the blaze he bowed and 
"Maje Franzolini,4041379925177488,15-10-1987
"
"     'Very well,' said Gandalf. `But we must not  use the wood -- not unless "
Chapter 1. A Long-expected Party 
of  thought which  was  quickly driven  from his mind. For  just as  Mablung 
"a  small  chamber  further  in,  more  removed  from  the  cold  outside.  It  was  quite "
"began to throw  missiles marvellou sly high, so that they passed  right above "
"     Nonetheless  they saw no sign of  an enemy that  day, nor the next. The "
"     `But  we are  neither,' said Frodo.  `And  travellers  we are, whatever  "
come  to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare  that suits me. How shall I 
"Gabriell Persehouse,4041596110676,09-08-2001
"
"     There  he  lay for a while, fighting  with despair. His head  swam, but "
"     'Come, let it pass then,' said Frodo. 'But now we seem to have  come to "
ON PARTY 
"Jacinthe Jannasch,4065010165115,01-10-1985
"
don't  suppose  you have much notion  where we are;  but I spent  my time at 
"the army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and with every mile "
"Emile Andreev,4041591783402,11-03-1980
"
speak but to chant softly: 
"     'No!' said Frodo; but  he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell "
""
Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam's  shears could now be 
"by  the  shore,  after  they  had  gone  and  the  shades  of  night  had  fallen. First  of  all  a "
"this stronghold had been  built  not to  keep enemies out of  Mordor, but to "
eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but before 
"Constantine Morland,4041375055412703,23-11-1989
"
"     'There  was  an Elvish  song  that  spoke  of this, or at  least  so  I "
you surely draw from it more dread than need be. Unless the people of Lurien 
 
"piercing  note. Even as  they sat and stood, as  if suddenly frozen,  it was "
"recruited the strength  of our people from the sturdy folk of the sea -coast, "
"sighed. 'Alas! there is little hope of  that for him. Yet  not  no hope. No, "
"lost for a while in the black orc-mines deep under the mountains, and there, "
had never issued from that vale since the  days of  Isildur's might; no host  
The  master  of  the  house  was  an  elf-friend-one  of  those  people whose  fathers 
having nothing to do but stare at the winter -lands crawling by and the  grey 
"coming.  His own folk quail at him,  and they would  slay themselves  at his "
And care  is  needed!' He leaned forward  and  looked at them. 'Watch  every 
some  northern glade amid  the beech-woods; Gimli  was fingering gold in his 
such care. When the labours of repair  had all been planned and set going he 
"####-""Put  on  a  few  eggs,  there's  a  good  fellow!""  Gandalf  called  after  him,  as  the "
"ruin  of  the  town  of  Dale  and  its  merry  bells,  and  the  burned  banks  of  the  bright "
"     Merry  wanted somebody to  talk to, and he thought of Pippin.  But that "
much on that road.  And  at its  end  nothing.' Picking up his orc-shield he 
"the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but the "
"harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot  trust, and  those I  can trust are too "
""
measure.' 
mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he said 
"But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they  will  not be corrupted. We "
""
"crash  into  the  pool. Out  leapt  the King  under  the Mountain,  and  his  companions "
"Martie MacCroary,4041374391225,11-05-1986
"
     came falling like a rain of flowers. 
"Elenore Brolan,4041597576643462,24-12-1983
"
could do nothing.  Gollum and Frodo were locked together. Gollum was tearing 
unpleasant  as  was  his  position  (to  say  nothing  of  the  poor  dwarves  underneath 
"that your plight was so evil,' he said. `Let Gimli  forget my harsh words: I "
"me  then.  Until  that  time, or some  other time beyond the vision  of  the "
     Faramir  laughed softly.  `Fish! '  he said.  `It  is  a less  perilous 
"tired but also very hungry indeed. ""It seems to be late morning,"" he said, ""and so I "
"Dre Zelland,4041379775786,02-09-1991
"
"so  bold, you've come back  changed from your travels, and you look now like "
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!' Then he went 
"Mureil Drane,4041370042160,20-01-1982
"
Actually Gollum  lived on a slimy  island of  rock  in  the middle of  the  lake. He 
Elfstone!' 
"year before, of course, now: a good year.' "
"fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps "
hale  but  ancient trees (though none looked  as ancient as Treebeard);  and 
"Suddenly  there  was  a  great  shout,  and  from  the  Gate  came  a  trumpet  call. "
"If he had looked back, he might have seen  not  far below Gollum turn again, "
"given over wholly to  idleness and  ease, and some fought among  themselves,  "
"outpost of the defences of Ithilien, made when, after the Last Alliance, Men  "
"     `Galadriel! ' he called, and  gathering his  courage  he  lifted up the "
"at them, and a faint  light of cunning  and eagerness flickered for a second "
"     Merry looked out in wonder upon this strange country,  of which he  had "
"across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of "
"     `Then, Master Elrond, you will have to  lock  me in prison,  or send me "
cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they had taken refuge was delved 
"     `Let us  sit and rest and  have  something to eat, here on the landing, "
parcels and small articles  of furniture.  On  every item there was  a label 
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.' 
"the splendour, the lust, the glory of such treasure had never yet come home to him. "
"the great dark wave climbing  over the green lands and above the hills,  and "
     He peered between the hemlock-leaves 
"     'Assuredly not. lord,' said  Wormtongue. 'I care for you and  yours  as "
####- 
"slowly  became aware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to "
"     The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave  of Bilbo  in his room, "
"sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this "
"His armour is shivered, "
"Syd Dowzell,4041372186882,12-02-1986
"
"Aaron Dunckley,4017959151247889,04-03-1993
"
"     At  last they halted. Then they turned aside,  leaving the highway  and "
"set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they expected to have all "
""
that even the memory of colours and of  forms and of any light faded out  of 
"centuries among Dwarves and such other folk, Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers,  "
keep  my  notes in  order;  but many  enquiries  could only  be answered  by  
""
"Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit's eyes, but the  Mymak of "
####-     'Where are you?' he cried out miserably. 
suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before 
"     Out of  the  shadows a  ladder  was  let  down:  it  was made  of rope, "
"Darsie Mation,4949994811820,25-05-2000
"
""
already perished.' 
"me, but that too must be left at the doors.' "
"Rockey Ecclestone,4273136135137739,15-02-1978
"
     Slowly Aragorn unbuckled  his belt  and  himself set  his sword upright 
"The riders looked down upon the crossings,  and  it seemed strange to  them;  "
     Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room. 
"took to a quiet life, writing a great dea l and  going through all his notes. "
anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!' 
####-horses are running mad. Look! the men are thrown; they are running  on foot. 
"were on  the way-and you  will see many others,  I  expect, before you leave "
a claw. 
be the quiet of peace. 
"above Rauros:  two of  my kin; a  Dwarf there was also,  and an Elf, and two  "
"grey ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls. "
interfere  when  she's pla ying.  Nothing gets by  Shelob  when  she's on the 
"against the wall. 'Here I set it,' he  said; 'but I command you not to touch "
knew where he came from.  We had made no secret of our return journey to his 
"walked his  knees  hardly bent, but  his  legs opened in  a great stride. He "
me 
"only a small gift.' She put into his hand a little box of plain  grey  wood, "
"Balrog's  feet it broke, and the stone  upon which it stood crashed into the "
"One day, perhaps, I will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in "
am glad indeed.' 
"went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins' oddities, past and "
"and thinking a bit. There's  nothing on the roads, and we'd best  be getting "
"sat on the lawns under the plum-trees  and ate, until they had made piles of "
"Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the knights of Gondor; and Legolas and "
which 
"being partial to  his vittles,  and old  Gorbadoc keeping  a mighty generous "
"of the Road ahead,  and they still knew in  which direction it  lay. In  any "
inevitable item). He was liable to drag  in bits of  what he  called poetry; 
two lads to keep a watch at  the gate for the folk that are coming. There'll 
"Sibbie Goulding,4041590324909988,03-04-2001
"
"bore it back  to  the Citadel. Then the withered tree was uprooted, but with "
the Dwarves against  any enemy that  might  capture  the  First Hall and the 
"more,' he said. 'That is  but a part, for I have forgotten much.  It is long "
"we have  seen that light before, and it has  long been rumoured in the City, "
inside. Clang.  The gate was  shut.  Sam  hurled  himself against the bolted 
"stone falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light  grew, and lo! the  company "
at each twig's tip. 
"companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left  at  Parth Galen "
""
     `A broken  sword  was on his knee. I saw  many wounds on  him.  It  was 
the  enemy. As  he  looked forth he  saw the eastern sky grow  pale. Then he 
bushes and  stunted trees  grew in dense patches with wide barren  spaces in 
often meant to  ask  Gandalf in Rivendell. I  am permitted to  wear  the One 
"nothing, and  with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin's lips. Denethor  "
"will have peace,'  he said, now in a clear voice,  'we will have peace, when "
"treasure. And if that was not enough for  fame, there was also his prolonged  "
"     `Save me,  but so  I had!' said Sam.  He whistled in dismay. 'Bless me, "
"to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs  towards the Road, "
"could  not  be  taken  by  surprise.  There  now  Dain  son  of  Nain  took  up  his  abode, "
to 
"Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel,  near the borders of Mirkwood. "
"that drove them on and filled them with hate and fury was wavering, its will  "
"on foot, pursued  by  mounted enemies? They might as  well  set  out for the "
"names, and what could be better?' "
The Elvenking looked at Bilbo with a new wonder.  
"After some time he felt for his pipe. It was not broken, and that was something. "
will be a danger  even to  the Wise. For nothing  is evil in the  beginning. 
"through the brown curls, he touched the eyelids, and called him by name. And "
passages or chapters that are to some a blemish  are all by others specially 
"impatience. `We must go,' he said. `We mustn't stand here. Make haste!' "
"amazement of the others, Saruman turned again. and as if dragged against his "
"     Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 'Eh, what?' said "
"The  crack  closed with  a  snap,  and  Bilbo  and  the  dwarves were  on  the wrong "
"####-     As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing  a  merry "
"     At that moment Gandalf  lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote the "
Faramir. `Farewell!' 
"Dale,  and  that he is  afraid. We  fear  that he may yield. Already war  is "
"Beverley Gealy,4041377028353675,25-09-1978
"
as  it  might  be  a  fire  or  torches  twinkling.  When  they  had  looked  at  it  for  some 
"the trees  by  the  shore,  shouting:  Frodo! Frodo!  in  their clear,  high "
####-house and wandered in his sleep into all his different rooms looking for something 
""
"Karita Tacon,4041593533002025,20-03-1986
"
     Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain! 
"already made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm, hm, he "
"Angie Krol,4017953871704725,24-06-1991
"
flowers  that  glimmered in the gloom and gave a faint  sweet scent. So tall 
"the  fray.  Swiftly  he  returned  and  his  wrath  was  redoubled,  so  that  nothing  could "
own city.  But it was taken by fell men whom the Enemy in his first strength 
him long to find a nice smooth egg-shaped one that fitted his hand cosily.  
forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?' 
it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike. 
"     'Not much  - only hints and riddles,' said Frodo evasively. 'Did you ask  "
"astonishment. `But I thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'I "
     He  lifted  Pippin  gently  and  carried  him  back to  his bed.  Merry 
"Melodee Clac,4017953733250,20-05-1984
"
"and  they sat at the King's table with Gandalf, and King Jomer of Rohan, and "
the dragon up against them deliberately! 
"biscuitish,  keeps  good  indefinitely,  is  supposed  to  be  sustaining,  and  is  certainly "
 
alive;  their  woods  and  fields  and  pastures  and  cattle  and  most  of  their  boats 
"Merrel Eglinton,4041592300332300,30-07-1984
"
leather jerkin is any good.' 
"stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.' "
"flung down. There was mourning and weeping, where but a little time ago the old "
"turned again and climbed yet more stairs, and yet more' stairs again. "
"Magdalen Gearing,4041374519065801,14-06-1989
"
"""They made  that  gate  ages  ago,""  he  said,  ""partly  for  a way  of  escape,  if  they "
"advice, I will for friendship's sake give it.  I think you  should now go at "
""
"Consalve Demogeot,4017958507779157,20-07-1987
"
"     'Down,  down!' he gasped,  clutching his hand  to his  breast,  so that "
"cells. The  great  bunch  seemed  very  heavy  to  his  arms,  and  his  heart was  often  in "
"kept  awake for fear  of your peril. We will send word when we may, and some "
"     'Indeed in this riding north I went without the king's leave, for in my "
"nothing since the night before, and they were getting puzzled. "
"     'With Treebeard and the Ents,' said Gandalf.  "
"winding, had cut a stony path down into  the valley. In it some bushes grew,  "
"come  to grief. There  were not only  many roads  to choose from, there were "
""
'Don't you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never mean to. I 
young 
""
voices: they reminded me of something I cannot  remember ---if I had seen you  
Frodo. `Let's see what it leads to!' 
"""We  shall  see, we  shall  see!"" he  said,  ""and  I  think  I have earned already some "
seemed good: messages reported that Moria ha d been entered and a great  work 
singing: 
"force  his knees to bend again, the stair ended. He stood still. The  voices "
"'This time you have nearly  succeeded, but you have failed again. It was not  "
"last  the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land: they had "
"the  ones that stay in the mind. Folk seem to have been just landed in them, "
"all again, saying: "
am sure it is true. You must forgive my not taking your word. If you lived near the 
"Flinn Rounsefell,4041593281157,15-04-1981
"
from hurting hobbits.' 
at  the greybeards and gammers who  said  that  they had  seen him  flying  in  the  sky 
####-They  could  still  see  his  hood  above  the  water  when  they  ran  to  the  bank. 
"came he's wanted alive, wanted quick.' "
power is now passing away. But your kinsman possessed this thing longer than 
"     Frodo looked at him as if at one now far away. 'Yes, I must  go on,' he "
"right and Orcs are near,  then none of us should wander alone, and you least  "
"alarming,  or so I am  told. I have  only once or twice  been in here  after  "
"piled it all up in a great heap far inside, and sleeps on it for a bed. Later he used to "
So  began  a  battle  that  none  had  expected; and  it was called  the Battle of Five 
""
events in the northern regions of Wilderland.  Frodo  learned that Grimbeorn 
gathering  to the summons of their Overlord; armies that had encamped before 
"night,  and quickly  ran to meet him. I thought he'd  look for them and with "
about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt 
"many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us, and they are glad; for "
     I sit beside the fire and think 
"     `So!' he said. `You bid me mind my own  affairs,  and get me back home,  "
"and up, on to the high western  ridge. The woods fell  away and they came to "
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford. 
"""Yes;  not  a  bad  fellow  as  wizards  go,  I  believe.  I  used  to  see  him  now  and "
"     'We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,' said Frodo;  'but we could "
"brown. 'Here is a mallorn-leaf  of Lurien, and there are small crumbs on it, "
"like shingle in  a storm; ever higher rose the hideous mounds, and still the  "
tower.  That had a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now 
which they could march far. The making of these was one of his secrets; but honey 
"Before him stooped the old figure, white; shining now as if with some  light  "
"Kym Beckwith,4017957009517,20-07-1980
"
"     'To find Mithrandir,' Pippin answered. "
"think  that it will  do  more than put off the evil  day,  unless other help "
"about him; but Sam found it difficult to do more than doze, even when Gollum "
This is indeed a strange chance!' 
"     'No,  I  don't  think  so,' Merry laughed. 'But that  is another story, "
"it. 'You  let  them  out  again, Old  Man Willow!'  he  said. 'What  be  you  "
####-fairly easy. 
on southwards.  
"and looking  down: but the light  seemed to be fading quickly, although  the  "
"which  there heaved  and floated  a wreckage of beams and  spars, chests and "
     'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already? ' 
"rick, cot, and tree. This was  a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for  "
"and held it against his heart. Then turning from the city of Morgul,  now no "
"     'I  thought of him too,' said Aragorn.  'We had many of these half-orcs "
last the Elves turned aside from the path.  A  green ride  lay almost unseen 
"nice bit o'  fat valley mutton  like what  this  is."" He  took a big bite off a  sheep's  leg "
"     'Gollum, gollum!' said Pippin. "
""
thrust out  far  into the stream like a  ridge of  teeth. The boats were all 
"Byron Vittet,4017951808963,12-10-1993
"
     Chapter 8   Farewell to Lurien   
open in  the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between  their immense 
"lost  their  time  tinder-boxes,  perhaps  we  can  make  a  little  light,  and  have  a  look "
""
"Or if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had  tidings  of "
"and a  heavy blow. The arm that  was broken  has been tended with due skill, "
"Idette Stubley,4041376120403388,16-10-1975
"
"they.  rested  on  the  grass  at  its  feet,  and  then  at  evening  began,  their  long  climb "
there; and we had  rather a fright. The lake began  to overflow and pour out 
still  went  on.  Then  they  saw  him  halt  and  stoop  for  a  moment;  but  they  did  not 
     `No! ' said Gandalf. 'We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar! 
"son.  After the  meal Pippin stayed a while,  and then took his leave, for a  "
I wonder what he will say?  ' 
"####-his side, and presented him to the company, saying: "
"the hall, and the company followed them in due  order. The doors were thrown "
""
suggests the kinship. There  was  a  great  deal in the background  of their 
"They  still  went  on  and  on.  The  rough  path  disappeared.  The  bushes,  and  the "
and was swallowed up. 
then he laid before them two swords. 
"were enheartened, and filled  with a new lust  and fury they came yelling to "
still they gathered and rallied and fought until the day wore away. 
     Pleading and  kind words were no longer of any  avail. It was not until 
upon a low chair  at his father's left hand. Removed a little upon the other  
"     'At  least  for a while,' said  Elrond. `The road must  be trod, but it "
"no possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step, mile by "
     There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up and ran. 
"####-     At length they came back  to  the Steward's Door,  and  Beregond looked  "
off down the current. 
swathed in black cloths.  
"known as  the  Gaffer. He held forth  at  The Ivy Bush,  a small inn on  the "
grow again in peace. When  this valley is filled there  is room and to spare 
"Ryann Passey,4041592255939,05-11-1991
"
into  the western ridge. Legolas was some way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a  
Here is the Sword  that was  Broken and is forged again! Will you aid  me or 
"flames in their hands. And they passed him  by. He  cowered , trying to creep  "
"####-whiter  than it  had  been  then,  and his  beard  and eyebrows were perhaps "
"worried.  The  afternoon  was  getting late,  and  he  thought  this  sudden "
"largely  in the  shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon  it,  it glowed "
     Merry stared at the lines of marching stones: they were worn and black; 
looked like elf-children  in the deeps  of time peering out of the Wild Wood  
"     'Farewell, Master Holbytla!'  he said. 'My body  is broken. I go to  my "
     To heal my heart and drown my woe. 
"     oaths he had taken, all fulfilled them. "
"     '""The  water is not deep,"" said Treebeard. ""It is dirty,  but that will "
more spared from the ships. Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath 
"fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of  evening began to fall, and it grew "
Gandalf s horse nearly slipped down the slope. 
of the rider; and when Jomer brought the  tidings that you  had gone at last 
Far  up above in  the darkness it was answered . Out of the  black  sky there 
"     `And perhaps that was the way of it,' said Frodo. `In that land, maybe, "
     The Isengarders seized Merry and  Pippin again  and slung them on their  
caution)  in  the  direction  of  the  light.  They  came  to  the  hill  and  were  soon  in  the 
"     I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away "
"""Some  are  in  the  hunt,""  said  the  wizard,  ""but  most  have  gone  back  to  their "
"going in these cold hard  lands, we  wonders, yes we wonders? ' He looked up "
""
"from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish. And run he did, "
"     'Come on,  Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more  stored in your head than you  "
said. 'Where it issues  from the shadow  of the vale a green hill rises upon 
"in these after -days. For  such is the  way of  it:  to find and lose,  as it "
"of a gully on the left, so sharp  and narrow  that it look ed as if the black  "
"Michele Whitta,4017955074054667,23-01-1986
"
"Lemmy Sabatini,4017955552115279,30-06-1977
"
"drank to them  and were glad. 'Thus,'  said Jomer, 'is the friendship of the "
up it a  winding path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling 
"     'You  forget  to whom  you speak,' said  Aragorn sternly, and his  eyes "
either side; in  front  of them a  passage ran back  down the  middle of the 
"In  the last need, Smjagol, I should put  on the Precious; and the  Precious "
the Nameless One  was ever named in  honour there;  and the  old wisdom  and 
"ridden long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning, "
"Esta Dunniom,4925828477483,04-02-1981
"
"     At last they rode over the downs and took the East Road, and then Merry "
"Elinore Bavidge,4041596442111506,15-08-1977
"
then with  marvellous agility a froglike figure climbed out of the water and 
 
"he undid  the  heavy  belt and let it fall to the ground,  and  the sheathed "
"two, and was thinking  about them; but  now I don't suppose I shall ever get  "
"Robbie De Blase,4017957827702,28-07-1991
"
"found that you could lose. But come, my friend,  let us not speak of it! Let "
old head long before. Then they just faded silently away in  the grey light. 
nice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm that 
"seemed  to him that he saw a  light:  a light in his mind, almost unbearably "
throat of one  huge  leader  Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with  a  
"or fancied, may lie behind. You have won  a battle  but  not a  war and that "
"Mirkwood,""  put  in  Gandalf,  ""and  it  is  entirely  an  accident  that  we  are  in  your "
Under the Mountain dark and tall. 
"it  as  secret,  I  kept  the  knowledge  in  my  head, until we formed  our "
"     'I do  not know how it happened,' answered Aragorn. 'Nor  do I know why "
minute.' 
"Mountain. We are few, but we remember still the king that was of old. Most of my "
"There  was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a  "
"     'I believe  you speak more  wisely than any of us,  Sam,' said Aragorn. "
"     'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn. "
"the passage  turned a corner, and dipped down again, and  there, at  the bottom of a "
"said Frodo. 'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after  "
"     'Not very wise,' said Faramir.  'But just: yes perhaps, as just  as our "
"Gustav Bendall,4041378198329,20-04-1978
"
called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do 
"that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful. "
     'Are the stories about it true?' asked Pippin. 
"millers, smiths, ropers,  and cartwrights, and others of that sort; for even "
"     'This seems  to  have been a guardroom, made for  the  watching  of the "
"many a stumble, since they had no hands to steady themselves with. Not for a long "
for your aid in all that has been achieved.' 
"to answer  there to Denethor, and my  life will justly be forfeit, if  I now "
""
"face grew graver, as  if what he learned disquieted  him. But Frodo felt the "
'attractions'  at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children.  'G  
"     For many a year he had gnawed it near, "
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were 
""
"Marleen Coster,4017951875013341,07-12-1992
"
"Leontyne Rymour,4017957494966,28-02-1994
"
"kingdom,  using  the  road  that  my  people  made?  Did  you  not  three  times  pursue "
"him to see. The knowledge which he obtained was, doubtless, often of service "
folk?' 
the stair on which  he  stood. The rail  rang and snapped . The stair cracked 
But nothing they could say would change his mind. 
then perhaps it may reward  you.  Though you should find all barren and laid 
do 
"off in all directions. He was through, with a torn coat and waistcoat, leaping down "
"     At that rage blazed in Sam's heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up, ran, "
"answer, not an echo, not even a tremor of the air. "
a footpath  winding  along on  this side  of the river. If  we turn left and 
"built, and a  number of  men had come out and were staring at  them over the "
hurry on. We are late.' 
""
"no fire, but lay huddled in the boats, moored close together. "
"the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf Gimli. It seems that "
"journey -- for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger  would bear him down "
Treebeard  might almost have been loitering about near the  gates on purpose 
"     'A  mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great  Rings, does not die, but "
"""What of the Arkenstone of Thrain?"" said he, and at the same moment the old "
"them, Legolas, do you think?' "
"the Enemy himself, and thus we have often been able to forestall him. It was "
"     And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast.'  "
"Hermy Maykin,4041375161994677,14-08-1980
"
"Phylis Narramore,4041594194383829,06-01-1980
"
"came,  flying  lower,  over  the  shoulder  of  the  Mountain,  and  whirled  above  them "
"And he called to her, and she came down, and they walked on the grass or sat "
revenge or the recovery of his own. But the Master was not sorry at all to let them 
dark. Treebeard lifted two  great  vessels and stood them on the table. They 
the raft and the boatmen went to feast in Lake-town. 
"Lani Lutsch,4225249246538,06-10-1991
"
up today for the first time.' 
""
""
"Matthus Casterton,4041378034102,14-09-1986
"
"doors. I'll not deny that I'll be glad now when I  do.' He lit his lanterns,  "
"cutting  had been made, at  some distance from the  Hedge, and  went sloping "
"Chad Birnie,4483633127547,21-10-1997
"
"origin  of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old "
"Dorey Pietersma,4017956575448499,08-06-2000
"
"Dew Beastall,4017956471011953,15-04-1995
"
"tonight."" "
"the moon was gone, and evening sprang into the sky.  "
"So, carefully! carefully with the plates! "
fiercest. All the  court was  choked with  dead orcs  or their  severed  and 
"Leonie Shadrach,4041597299791,05-04-1989
"
"""Before  we  go,  I  suppose  you  mean,""  said  Thorin.  ""Aren't  you  the  burglar? "
"with Gandalf,  and  they went to and fro as  they  wished. And Frodo said to "
"     Pippin looked at  him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men that he "
"     At  length  the  Lady Galadriel  released them from her  eyes,  and she "
"     Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended. "
(which is also very wise). No dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk and 
for the Fords had ever been a place full  of the rush  and  chatter of water  
"Dorian Haddock,4041376780795172,24-11-1978
"
"and uncanny memory for shapes  in  the dark, he seemed to know just where he "
"not  make  out  what  he  had  bumped  into,  scrambled  away  on  all  fours,  slipped "
"himself, and now he  stood beside Beregond in the front  rank of Gondor with "
"men  were hushed. And he  sang to them, now in the  Elven-tongue, now in the "
"Merle Georgeon,4041376621127213,06-03-1994
"
"you often  been to Rivendell?' said  Frodo. 'I have,' said Strider. 'I dwelt "
"must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow,  and "
came the moon rose above the eastern shore and silvered his great wings. 
"There  the  guards awaited him, and  heralds  stood, and all  the  lords and "
"of Faramir  and Mithrandir. Presently Pippin saw torches, and followed by  a "
and their rocks. But the wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his wand  - as he did 
"     'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,' said Gimli. "
"Frederick Keller,4041590462388,19-12-1983
"
the air of Mordor  that dried the mouth. When Sam thought of water  even his 
"wizard  all  that  day  until  the  evening.  Just  before  sunset  he  walked  into  the  hall, "
 * BOOK V *  
"to take the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The "
"Lorrie Giottini,4017953526845600,16-10-1977
"
do.' 
"in the hillside, and near it footprints not  more than  a day or two old. In "
away into a wall of black shadow far ahead. Neither  man  nor orc now  moved 
bedroom. 
"expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am "
A Warm Welcome 
beginning of the trees as afternoon was wearing away. 
"gate, and  flowed away, fuming  and  chattering, into  calmer and more level "
burned down to the surface of the lake. That was the dragon's hope. They could all 
up  in  crackling  fire.  There  was  a  sudden  flurry  of  sparks  and  smoke.  Bilbo  had 
"in the fender, knocking over the poker and shovel with a crash. "
"records  of  it  shall  be left  in  Gondor,  where also dwell the  heirs of "
Riders!' 
answered 
"and with many an ""at your service, O master of the wide wooden halls!"" But their "
"collect information about  hobbits living  outside the Shire,  especially in "
not  going  through  the village  tonight.  Too  many ears pricking and eyes 
snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure. 
together ever again.' 
the City like thunder running in the clouds. But the doors of iron and posts 
"     'Because I must,' he said. 'Only so can I see any hope of doing my part "
     Suddenly he  stopped as if  listening.  Frodo became aware that all was 
""
"stranger,' said Pippin. 'We left Hobbiton  secretly enough, and  I don't see "
"could not  stick  to his  friends  and  come  along with  them,  and why  the wizard had "
"Star Domel,4041591392545753,12-04-1993
"
""
"""Of  course!""  said Bilbo,  and  sat down  in  a hurry. He missed  the  stool  and  sat "
Morning  went  on.  People  came  and began (by  orders) to  clear away  the 
"Cobbie Taverner,4041598735376549,23-05-1992
"
"""So  it  is  a  pool  or  a  lake,  and  not  an  underground  river,""  he  thought.  Still  he "
"####-""Who'll cross first?"" asked Bilbo. "
"Council,  and  only then in  gravest need. The others  go  with him  as free "
do as you like  about my  reward: take me as a guide  or  not. But I may say 
I 
"Past the marsh's waving weeds, "
our thoughts to our own defence.' 
"Englebert Curd,4041598864936428,13-02-1999
"
     The horses wer e gone.  They had dragged their pickets and  disappeared.  
"     '""No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul "
"""Get down now to your friends!"" he said to Bilbo, ""or I will throw you down."" "
     'I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?' sa id a muffled voice - but the 
which they are  fleeing; but  I  think  they are spying out the land. I have 
"taking it he would have fallen. He would have kept it  for his own, and when  "
"     'Well!' said Frodo at  last, sitting  up and straightening his back, as "
"all,  and  the oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So  when you  "
"time and way of handing it over, you can hardly blame me, considering the trouble "
there was a wide view East and South and West. 
"eyes and eyebrows, and as for his beard, he had to cut most of it off. Well, between "
heard. 
 
"smouldering in his eyes; the  other,  clad all in green, slowly,  swaying  a  "
"Hadley Olney,4041372329107102,11-02-1981
"
"away the Riders on  the plain saw its black towers mov ing behind the sun, as "
"off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed "
southern faces of the  mountains. Its steep slopes were grass-grown; but all 
 
"they were exciting and  life was a bit dull, a kind of a sport, as you might "
"     Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe, "
"looking long at the hobbits: 'Hoom, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come "
upon stones; but now they  were  silent. The beds of the  stream were almost  
Chapter 1. Minas Tirith 
"again,  hissing  behind  his hand, as  if to  keep  the  sound  from  unseen "
when a Rider galloped up from the rear of their line. 
"Gollum, maybe?  ' "
"then you had best leave this  land. There is  trouble now on all our borders,  "
last remark remained unexplained. 
     The Sackville-Bagginses were  rather offensive. They began  by offering 
upon  you. You are the  Bearer  appointed by the  Council. Your  own way you  
will  give their word not to try and see.  I  could trust them to shut their 
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or  
"found that the music and the singing had stopped, and they were all looking at him "
"Good-bye!"" "
spilled ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end. 
"already! I should  be happier, if we  were not obliged  to stand and  watch, "
"Frederich Roscam,4017951248764,20-04-1993
"
need  them. But I am sure I  do  not know  where we shall find more; for all 
     Chapter 2   The Passing of the Grey Company   
"Frodo's  fiftieth year,  showed that  even in the comfortable  heart of  the "
"heels,' said  the messenger. 'They have paid dear for the  crossing but less "
"     'We fought far under the living earth, where time is  not counted. Ever  "
"####-often  despaired of  getting their pony up, or  indeed of finding a path for  "
""
"     'Unless  the  king  should  come  again?' said Gandalf. 'Well,  my lord "
"Tiffy Dewing,4041378935928,09-01-1981
"
noisome darkness behind;  but the  breath of  them  revived  him.  He  crept 
and I.' 
"this Sun, and few of old came thence unchanged, 'tis said. "
"that  they halted  and got out cloaks and  hoods, which soon became  bedewed "
"crept along the road towards the mountains. This road, too, ran straight for  "
then off they galloped to the buildings. 
Gimli's boat; but I didn't  give much heed to it. Then  it seemed as if  the 
"Catie Artz,4017951867597,01-01-1984
"
platform. Faramir and Frodo looked down. Far below them they  saw  the white 
likely  enough with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have  been trying 
"fountain.  Their  hearts  were  heavy;  for it was a fair  place, and it had "
     and yearned again to find afar 
pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes. as good friends must at a pinch.' 
they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates.  
""
"of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in "
"Mathilda Gooderick,4041375061813548,31-08-1983
"
beam  flowed out  brightly  from a  door  that  was  opened.  There  was Tom 
him to my  house. You'll not have need to  go near the old  Hobbiton village 
"not, for were you ten times as wise you  would have no right  to rule me and "
"where  there were  no  people  left,  no  inns,  and  the  roads  grew  steadily worse. Not "
"Also he had caught a glimpse of a fire  through  the  trees, and that appealed to him "
Then  they  drank  once  round  and  became  mighty  merry  all  of  a  sudden.  But 
"about it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the thongs "
the rush of their wide wings as they passed over was like a gale. 
"     'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,' said Faramir. 'If "
flying blindly  this way with the  pursuit  just behind. We cannot block the 
doom went the drums in the deep. 
"have gone, that  decides me. I am going  into  the Old  Forest  first  thing "
great  light that  illuminated her  alone  and left all else dark. She stood 
"""Anyhow you are wasting time now. Don't you realize that the trolls must have "
"keep awake  any  longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good  "
we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light 
"     'Not of all that go on two legs,' said  Legolas. 'There I think you are "
"     'Nine o'clock we'd call it in the Shire,' said Pippin aloud to himself.  "
"than Thorin Oakenshield,  descendant  of kings, and his twelve companions in "
     At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits in the great 
"with this wind they  will soon be at hand, indeed several ships have already "
it.' And then he paused. 
"Griselda Chatten,4509935845525,18-09-1996
"
"Jillana Goudy,4017953804747,30-10-1982
"
"Kally Peers,4662704314786482,31-08-1985
"
"would ride up, and leap from  the saddle  and hasten into the City. But most  "
"     The old man took no notice,  but stooped and sat himself on  a low flat "
"nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they can only come to "
veering southwards between the brink of the channel and  a steep fall of the 
force across the River away beyond the Gate of Kings. 
"it, they creep out of sight, they  avoid its shadow. But master will have to "
"until it  came  to  an opening  between two  steep shoulders. Beyond,  there "
"stones  like  small pyramids or  the  heaped skulls of a conqueror, and then "
"you he gets angry easily."" "
before the hunters; and the Rohirrim went hither  and thither at their will. 
blackness that was already reaching out  westwards with long arms. There was 
Elfstone son of  Arathorn of the House  of  Valandil  Isildur's  son heir of 
"stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn's side, and Gandalf rode upon "
"these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk  "
"Bag End  than she once hoped, and she was now  a  hundred years old. "
     `That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built ' said 
"Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond, and the more do I rejoice.' "
"     'Let me see,' said Merry: 'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the "
"     'A week!' said Hirgon. 'If it must be so, it must. But you are like  to "
"remember several more, but I would   take my oath it was never a whole month. "
he still  had some strength left. The lembas had a virtue without which they 
"sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in  a place to which "
to  join the road that came  over the Morgul Pass. Then on it went through a  
"his  fingers  thoughtfully. `Have it  your own way, Mr.  Frodo,' he  said at "
"Olivie Begbie,4041379393156311,05-11-1998
"
blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlurien. Gimli  the dwarf took  
""
'And what is he doing in this part of the world?' 
"the men of Gondor, risen like avenging ghosts from the graves of valour long "
Faramir cried: 
"     'This counsel seems good to me now,' said Thjoden. 'Let all my folk get "
to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty. Had  I been warned of your 
"settled to rest. Whether he had slept by himself in some hole nearby, or had "
     When it reached the  tree and was level with Frodo  the  horse stopped. 
"questions. `She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,' he said. "
passed them. Looking up they saw the clouds breaking and shredding; and then 
"withstood  the  storms of time, so  there  the palantnr  of  that tower  has "
"ourselves up as wander  about any more,  or try  to go back. Our  food won't  "
will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.' 
There will be no dawn.' 
his mind to the  road that lay ahead. Behind him Merry  rode  on Stybba with 
"thinner,  and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes  and other  strange "
"Albie Stanmore,4138511593622122,11-01-1983
"
"""Let's  get  out  of  this  horrible  smell!""  said  Fili  So  they  carried  out  the  pots  of "
"Mikel Van Der Vlies,4041592268824355,10-10-1993
"
"near, it seems.' "
"stone, standing  tall  under  the  sun above,  and at this hour  casting  no "
"there  is  the Side-door, and dragons must sleep sometimes, I suppose. If you sit on "
Then he lay very still. 
Frodo: two  galloped madly towards  the Ford  to  cut  off  his escape. They 
"Kyrstin MacGowan,4017955157874759,08-05-1975
"
"and bent  all his guild  to the hunting of the  Ring, then indeed hope would "
"belt of Lurien gleamed  about  his waist. His helm they set beside  him, and "
"""Now come with me,"" he said, ""and taste the new wine that has just come in. I "
"     'I don't think you quite understand things, Pippin,' said Frodo. 'Lotho "
     The  Morthond Vale made a  great  bay that beat up  against  the  sheer  
"     'That I know,' he  said. 'You  desired  to  have  the love  of the Lord "
light of morning  they went their way towards  the  Houses  of Healing;  and 
"take your rest, then you  shall walk in this garden in the sun, as you will; "
"seemed to be  smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf "
"and  fierce, but they came from over  the mountains, and were unused  to the  "
the wild encroached upon it. The handiwork of Men of old could still be seen 
"was, indeed,  just  about  to stop and propose going back (if that was still "
"remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and  well planned, from "
     At the  gate  of the  Citadel they found no guard.  'Then Beregond  has 
"     'Then  let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his "
"Andria Agastina,4776294533212,11-10-1997
"
"to stay here, until the end."" "
"the Riders, and though I gained  on them day by day,  they were  ever before "
"Chadd Napper,4041379623259,25-10-1999
"
     Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon  
"The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled. "
"his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and "
still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of 
"     When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. `The  day has "
knew no more. 
     There shall be counsels taken 
arrow. 
"doubt.  But I know now  where we are:  we  have reached the First Deep,  the "
     At  that moment the Wraith-king  turned and spurred  his horse and rode 
"the Sea, such as Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror  in Doriath, and so "
covered with fresh-cut turves: about it were planted fifteen spears.  
"beyond Archet, and out  in the wilds north-away. It's like a  bit of the bad "
"     There came a day when  Gandalf could not  be  found, and  the Companions "
"     'No,'  said Pippin. 'It  won't be  so easy scaring them  a second time. "
"Holden De Hailes,4041590305603,15-07-1975
"
"on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he "
"Siana Decent,4892307190705535,16-10-1995
"
"passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your  part is "
small river that ran at the foot of The Hill. It was often said (in other families) that 
"     'I will vouch  for him before the seat of Denethor,' said Gandalf. 'And "
"myself to the king. Now I am in great need, and I ask for help,  or at least  "
Time. 
"     'They need more gardens,' said Legolas. 'The houses are dead, and there "
"uneasy, and rumours of  the world outside trouble him. I  saw him  four days "
word-hoard; then  it  also occurred to him that his  master had been  right:  
"Amanda Senogles,4041372997621038,14-12-2001
"
"Walliw Masurel,4017954355975047,03-09-1990
"
"Merrielle Belfrage,4041597783620,26-06-1989
"
"till beards blaze, and eyes glaze; "
"Vonny Pepineaux,4422974521759538,10-09-1989
"
"to  his forehead, as  if  trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried. "
the  woodmen  was  going  on;  but  they  goon  learned  what  had  really  happened. 
     `Swear? ' said Frodo. 
"if  not  very  fine;  for  Wood-elves  were  not  goblins,  and  were  reasonably  well-"
""
after  a  while  I  may  think  again  of  your  words  and  go  North  with  any  that  will 
"     'We shall  see,'  said  Strider.  'Let us hope  to hold the  fort  till "
paved way  had  wound upwards from  the lowlands of  the  Dwarf-kingdom.  
court behind the outer wall. 
that  they had passed before; and Sam hoped always  in  some shadow  of  the 
"Welch Robrose,4017959339474,06-08-1981
"
cries for help had come in the night – and by luck (he was born with a good share 
"really empty, some were  tubs neatly packed with a dwarf each; but down  they all "
"     'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'It will be "
figures fled from the house.  One  of them  let fall a  hobbit-cloak  on the 
"     Another  long screech rose and fell,  and  he threw  himself back again "
"nigh  as good  marksmen  as myself, on  either bank.  We  wait only for your "
"after  a  while  they turned and looked back,  they saw the King of the West "
and passed round to a great gap in the wall further eastward. 
it. And it will afford me  some comfort as I wander to think that you pulled 
"power and peril it must be.  A  fell weapon, perchance, devised by  the Dark  "
"     And the other perian Meriadoc who is  under my care, what of him?' said "
"course. There, maybe, we shall see some sign that will guide us.' "
"struck  a spark into  the tinder,  it kindled the dry grass  and a flurry of "
     Of a troll that sits in the hills alone. 
""
"####-while  the voyage lasted.  If he  was still following, he  was very wary and "
the  report  that  no horse or pony was to be got for love  or  money in the 
"####-ghvsh;  that is  ""fire"". Then something came into the chamber  --  I felt it "
are drowned in water --or in a shadow of fear.' 
"folk,  and  is  too  good  for  you.  It  cannot  be  pierced  .by  arrows;  but  if  you  do  not "
"behind  was an old game of his,  and  seldom  had he failed in it.  But this "
"my  fathers,  until  the world  is  renewed. Since  I  leave  now  all  gold  and  silver,  and "
good  draught  of  Entwash.  We  have   worked  hard;   we  have  done  more 
Men from their feasting in the White Tower.' 
twisting and grabbling at his ankle. `It hurts us.' 
'Look!'  He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Orcs  and  Men 
right.  Soon it  began  to descend  rapidly and they  guessed  that  it must 
"least difficult, so at last he crept behind a tree just behind William. "
there  be  battle  in  the  valley.  I  do  not  call  this  counsel  good.  Though  they  are  a 
"     'Forlong  has come,' Bergil answered; 'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of "
"came in her  pale face.  'How should I ease your care,  my  lord?' she said. "
glance of longing. 
""
""
"and if he was already in Mordor, or if he was dead; and he did not know that "
forests of the South. Before the wall's foot  the dead and broken were piled 
"pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows  of "
lengthened his  years far beyond their span;  but that power only  the Great 
""
""
"mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain -washed forget-me-nots, and "
"slept in a corner, tired but uneasy, dimly aware of  comings  and goings and  "
"who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and "
"Melisandra Noell,4041597864917,01-02-1975
"
"come, if fortune had been kinder.' "
"gem. Not so the  One.  It  was round  and  unadorned,  as it were one of the "
"paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with "
"him. The one small garden of a free gardener was all his need and due, not a  "
"Virgie Ashforth,4017951654276,22-03-1978
"
hoped  that the king was not going to follow  them into the darkness beyond.  
"coming to  an end. A  long valley  la y below  them winding  away northwards,  "
seems fainter and more distant;  sometimes nearer and darker. It  is growing 
plunged quickly into the  thick bushes beside the stream. 'Whew!' he said to  
"how he used it: on his journey, I mean.' "
"""Look!""  said  one.  ""The  lights  again!  Last  night  the watchmen  saw  them start "
"Toothless bites, "
"You go, my lad! "
"that odd now?'  he  said  softly  to himself. 'Yet after all,  why  not? Why "
 
"     The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at Great "
"fallen,  but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness the Orcs came "
"the  dwarves  in  their  horrible  language,  with  their  tongues  hanging  out,  and  their "
"Zarla Give,4000446483881,22-09-1988
"
rather to be failing than growing. 
is  no smith's forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not even the 
"     As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, some "
politely.  
"had seen or heard of him, and  he had begun  to think that  the wizard would "
are weaving webs to wind me. 
"But  all  the men  of  arms  who  were  still  able,  and  the most  of  the  Elvenking's "
""
"drew himself up, slowly, as a man  that is stiff from long bending over some "
"####-more  or less in our direction, east and a little  north. That is the path I "
"save that  his eyes were keen as stars; and he looked at them and bowed, and  "
Wise can see. 
it seemed  to him that the  power and light came that held all the  land  in 
"a light wind  above their heads, made a black net aga inst the pale sky. They "
counsel?' asked Gluin. 
began to  tell  them  tales  to keep their minds  from  fear. He  knew  many 
again to a  very small and  frightened hobbit. He was now  passing under the  
with  their  long arms stretched out to  seize  him. The foremost  fell with 
"riding round twice as far as you needed. ""Well,"" thought I, ""if they're such  "
Mr. Baggins came to a place where the trees on either hand grew thinner. He could 
"     'Maybe,'  muttered Sam.  'It  is also as good a way of saying ""here  we "
"torn and tumbled; and a cry went up into the shuddering air, and faded  to a  "
The  place stank  and was  full of filth and  disorder: it did not appear to 
"There was a hissing and cursing almost at his heels at  first,  then  it stopped. All at "
"imagined it, that  as he spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam  of his  eye had "
"     The two powers strove in him. For a moment,  perfectly balanced between "
"small  green  lamps  coming  up  the  slope.  Terrified  he  tried  to  run  faster,  but "
"""Drat  the  bird!""  said  Bilbo  crossly.  ""I  believe  he  is  listening,  and  I  don't  like "
"     'Twice you have  borne me,  Gwaihir my friend,'  said  Gandalf. 'Thrice "
"where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly towards  the  foot  of the "
said: 'At last they have come. Let all the City be made ready!' 
"once beyond the Anduin, first taking oaths never  again to assail Sauron the "
pretended to have the power to give. It  need not be  said that I refused to 
     Presently it  grew  altogether  dark: the air  itself seemed  black and 
"fallen on his own  heart. He put Frodo  in front  of  him  now, and  kept  a  "
"     `Oh  well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll "
     Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the great 
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck  over a line  or  
"     and passed, and never sight he saw "
drops on to  his  feet. Listening to the tinkling of  the drops  the hobbits 
####-their journey down to Anduin. 
"some time, making no sound.  Presen tly the voices began to recede again, and "
was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were  too eager to  be 
"####-steadily dwindled as it climbed upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more "
land  became  steadily  more  tame and  well-ordered.  Soon they  came  into  
Old  Forest  than of anything I  know about:  the  stories  about  it  are a  
the gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor; and  they could  descry the  marshes 
"     'Long yet will that march be delayed,' said Boromir. 'Gondor wanes, you  "
"""It mustn't  ask  us,""  shrieked Gollum.  ""Not  its  business,  no,  gollum!  It's  losst, "
"####-hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid "
remember it ere the end. Farewell!' 
 
to hear it. It's a pity: for I've missed a good friend. And now I'm sorry to 
but in the forest stirred no leaf: 
"Jesselyn Brunton,4017954705515386,10-07-1976
"
"him, laying Merry's head  in his lap. He felt his body and limbs gently, and "
us go free. Or seek to carry  out your law. If you do so there will be fewer  
again and grew dull. In  spite  of the  fading of his  sword  the feeling of 
"Galadriel sat upon a white palfrey  and  was robed all in glimmering  white,  "
"to  you or to others, if you tried to meddle  with it  again."" Odd  sort  of "
"Precious, anyway.' "
"Perceval Coneau,4017951810936,22-01-1978
"
""
"yet, lady, I could not have come hither, if  it were not that the road which "
"in the twilight under the eye of the  dark power that rules the Rings.  Yes, "
the 
"the West  and  leaving us,' said  Sam, half chanting the words, shaking  his "
it said of me in song only that I was always left behind!' 
you driving at? Let's come to  the point before all the Orcs of  Mordor come 
"     'So  it was  indeed,' answered  Elrond gravely.  `But my memory reaches "
"'Nor  indeed more timely,'  said Jomer. 'You come none too soon,  my friend. "
Great Gate ere the closing.' 
Ring in his hand.  The head of  the  orc-company appeared in the Cleft right  
"     Gandalf spoke  now to Shadowfax, and  the horse set off at a good pace, "
yonder in the Dimholt. But what lies beyond no man knows.' 
that  outside  autumn was  coming  on.  Their  feet  ruffled  among  the  dead  leaves  of 
"and heads held high. Though they ad expected something to happen eventually, "
     He  climbed up and  found Legolas beside Aragorn and Jomer. The elf was 
"in the country. Saruman's home could  be all wrecked, and he could be turned "
"     'I tried to get  away, because I thought  it would fly out; but when it "
"     Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling, "
"Things had gone on like this for some time, when the ravens brought news that "
the others. They came running up. 
"Westfold, old and young, children and women,' said Gamling. 'But great store "
on! ' he said. `This is no place to sit in.' 
"Sullivan Sitlinton,4017953758117,08-10-1998
"
"You are  familiar with Thorin's style on  important occasions, so  I will not give "
"deeds? Your bearing is lowly in my presence,  yet it is long  now  since you  "
darkness. It did indeed become very dark again; for the moon passed westward 
"Hobbits of the Shire,  far to  the North and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo "
"""You  may  indeed!  I  come  from  under  the  hill,  and  under  hills  and  over  the "
He 
"Gusella Mercy,4041370879033,14-10-1986
"
"ago striding among the trees, and  I  think he saw me, for he  paused; but I "
"Henrietta Fitzsimons,4041370631285,02-07-2001
"
"the  barrel  rolled  round  and  ducked  him  under  again.  It  was  really  empty,  and "
tomorrow.' 
"Chrissy Jenks,4041590582306117,10-05-1991
"
"hobbits, no doubt: just a  funny story about  those funny people away beyond "
"if that's about as far as we are ever going  to get. My word, but the Gaffer  "
can 
"####-     Renewed shall be blade that was broken, "
     'One hobbit at least stood  here for a while and looked  back; and then 
strong wind from the West was now driving the fumes of Mordor from the 
"Dane Hadigate,4041596964023,13-05-1985
"
""
     Chapter 7   The Pyre of Denethor  
"'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.' "
""
""
the ache and sense of deadly chill took  away all sleep.  He lay tossing and 
"Alastair Hendron,4024519026955,02-12-1980
"
"of course  it is, precious.  We guessed they were cruel hobbits. They visits "
     When  those  whose advice and opinion I sought corrected little hope to 
Winter. 
all  things to a nicety in  the scales  of his malice. But the only  measure 
shout. if his parched throat had allowed him; for amid the rugged humps  and 
"towards the bridges and was foiled! The bridge was gone, and his enemies were on "
might be hidden almost anywhere between them and the mountains. They came on 
undone  till  ordered?  Not  the  fellow  who  used  to  tell  such  wonderful  tales  at 
""
dominion of  the Dark Lord;  and he would have tormented you   for trying  to 
"chair, 'I wanted to catch you and have a few final words. I suppose you feel "
"with  his  staff.  Open,  open! he shouted, and followed  it with  the  same "
####-him; even as the light of  his  power was hidden u nder his  grey mantle.  He 
They were near to the Gates of Moria. 
"tunnelled back into the  walls upon their  inner side, so that all  the open "
 
"recall. The Ring misseth,  maybe, the heat of Sauron's hand, which was black "
"Goldberry, took her hand. "
"you'll regret it. I shall set steel  to you, if you don't obey. And when you  "
"As he  stared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved under the trees;  the "
"Kerrie Erickson,4662691797988661,09-01-1988
"
"could hold; also he had had lots of beer. ""Poor little blighter! Let him go!"" "
plots a nd mischief at a safe distance? But this time thou hast stuck out thy 
and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep. 
arranged  a  more  comfortable  journey.  Still-all  very  much  at  your  service  once 
the rest of it? I don't know anything about this country.' 
"Cleveland Vaney,4041593067234,16-06-1977
"
foot long by the feel of them; they've stuck through everything I've got on. 
"Maegan Stannard,4017953963477,15-09-1998
"
"     'No, not dead, so far as I know,' said Treebeard. 'But he is gone. Yes, "
"When Bilbo came  to himself, he was  literally by himself. He was  lying on  the "
made into a pile that glistened and  sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie 
need.' 
with one hand clutching the rope so tight that they could not get it from his grasp; 
 
"Cyndie Cuss,4017950218709490,20-06-1989
"
direction of the Woody End. 
"Brandy Hall, the ancient home of the Brandybucks.  "
"     He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him "
There in the shadows on a large flat stone sat a tremendous goblin with a huge 
"""There is a long road yet,"" said Gandalf. "
"Baggins, alone and unaided. "
"with  it  a  bitsy,  my  preciousss.  It  like  riddles,  praps  it  does,  does  it?""  He  was "
shallow  .water  heaved  and  shoved.  The  barrels  now  all  lashed  together  creaked 
"shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke  no word, and Aragorn was still divided in "
"said that there are still havens of. the High Elves, but they are  far north "
"and have  ever  proved true  to us,  aiding us  at  need,  and  guarding our "
"were many: small  fowl whistling  and  piping in  the reeds,  but  they were "
"     Pippin went on  talking for a while. `I  hope, if I  do  go to sleep in "
"the Men;  and the  Chief didn't hold with beer, save for his Men, and closed "
"Sheffy Antal,4017959379892,03-09-1985
"
"The  dwarves  are  exceedingly  strong  for  their  height,  but  most  of  these  were "
"Elrond and with Gandalf, and here they lingered still in converse with their "
"Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success "
days it would take to sing all their names. 'I wonder what the Entish is for  
     The  sky  now  was  quickly clearing and the sinking  moon was  shining  
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue. 
"done no harm, sir, nor me.' "
"shaking him. `It's a shame to wake you,' whispered Sam, `but that's what you "
"Thea Friedenbach,4041591854303097,25-10-1976
"
"stumpy, and  clad only  with grass about his waist. Merry  felt  that he  had "
"Marc Greswell,4041370811606,05-12-1987
"
spite of his fears. 
"have  long  had  but  have  never  before  used  or  wanted.  His  fire  belched  forth,  the "
of  the  long valley which  they  had  seen in the  morning.  Once they were 
Something  in  his  voice  gave  the  dwarves  an  uncomfortable  feeling.  Slowly 
than 
     ENT. 
"could  think  of.  Asking  them,  and  sometimes  guessing  them,  had  been  the  only "
"maggot-ridden buds were  only  just  opening. Flies,  dun or grey, or black, "
     About this time legend among  the Hobbits first  becomes history with a  
"the Sea  became  a word  of fear  among them, and a token of death, and they "
"coming on, and we ought to get a move on.' "
"glittered  in the  last  light of the Moon,  as  they spread over the plain. "
"men would come up  from  the South and  take  some of  the casks away, and others "
"chieftain. A great  king and sorcerer he was  of  old,  and now  he wields a  "
"And Treebeard  filled  three bowls, and they drank; and they saw his strange "
"went steadily up. But how long was it, how much more of this would they have "
"     The face  of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was "
"Eleonora Latchmore,4041598803589379,01-02-1990
"
"     'Oh, no!' said Treebeard. 'None  have died from  inside, as  you  might "
After a while Gollum stopped weeping and began to talk. He seemed to be having 
Black Riders.' 
"Ediva Parmley,4041379953235,16-08-1999
"
bows. 'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! ' said Legolas.  
"     `Well, you can go on looking forward,' said Gandalf. `There may be many "
"At last the time came for him to say good-bye to his friends. ""Farewell, Balin!"" "
"steel or  fire, unbreakable except  by some  convulsion that would rend  the "
"said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never went "
"Anastassia Pauleau,4041371787856028,09-05-1995
"
their arrows after them. 
mountain-palace and up towards the Front Gate. 
"     `Then let us force a path thither, you and I!' said Aragorn. "
passes of the Ephel D®ath which  he and Frodo had  scaled. The  confused and 
"called it the Black Shadow, for it came from the Nazgyl.  And those who were "
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees 
"questions.  Though  they  were  much  relieved,  they  were  inclined  to  be  grumpy  at "
"dale, where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt, g reatest  of lore-masters. Therefore "
"Ernaline Lenham,4215621357600846,20-03-1979
"
reached up to roofs of smoke and cloud. Out from  their feet were flung huge 
"fields, save only the  burnings that ever multiplied, and the lines  of fire "
"voice, more clear than any there had ever heard a mortal man achieve before: "
gathering! 
passes through this night that  can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower  
"a while,  but  soon it began to  bend  away southwards,  until it came right "
"like a roaring wind. His hot breath shrivelled  the grass before  the door, and drove "
end of the road. 
"Sharlene Clapson,4041598177068307,21-10-1982
"
breast the ph ial of Galadriel and the  little box that  she gave him for his 
even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.' 
     And in the glade a light was seen 
"us, riding northward. I wonder what is happening in this land!' "
"mountain-seat;  its battlements  glittered with  steel, and its turrets were "
"Lib Kelsell,4041596051540,06-10-1995
"
"Ty Hardeman,4017959300856,11-03-1983
"
But as time passed we went  more  seldom and  wandered less far. And now the 
head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed. 
"way, I wonder?' He turned.  'Just now, Pippin,  my heart almost  failed  me, "
time he tried something a bit more difficult and more unpleasant: 
"Merill Mabe,4041374804375568,09-09-1985
"
bound with silver. 
"broken,  but I've gathered  it  together. It's not far short of  what you've "
"Here they laboured in the Dark Years, before ever a ship came to the western "
guess.' 
""
eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp  angle  and  went 
do  on  horses.  Now  it  seemed  that  a  great  goblin-raid  had  been  planned  for  that 
"Ketty Hinnerk,4041374198070882,13-09-1994
"
"up again,  many fathoms at a single  leap: a great grey cliff  loomed before "
choose.' 
"     `No,'  said Frodo. `If we kill him, we  must kill him outright. But  we "
"silent till deep night fell. Then at last, to keep himself awake, he crawled "
"wielder of  the Sword  Reforged, victorious  in  battle,  whose hands  bring "
"hard stone, cold fish, sneaking and whispering. All these thoughts passed in a flash "
unimportant and unsafe. 
this troll-country?' 
"them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire.' "
"before Sauron, and before the first  stone of Barad-dyr; and she served none "
"Pierson Stenet,4512082083676,22-03-2001
"
the high and distant mountains. 
and 
"Ardelis Wanjek,4041597003869680,23-12-2001
"
and without steps. Gollum did not let them rest long. 
"Bywater.  'Baggins is his name, but he's more than  half a  Brandybuck, they "
"old  man hooded and cloaked, very like  to Gandalf, as many now recall.  His "
"""Shut  up  yerself!""  said  Tom,  who  thought  it  was  William's  voice.  ""Who's "
"often treacherous: they  were worn and  smooth at  the  edges, and some were "
"slipped  out   together  just  after  your  ""accident"".  Not  all  of  those "
"Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper. "
"Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the  other, and  moved them "
"come out on a different pass, one more easy to travel by, so that they often caught "
"Jordanna Matzke,4017957116619,04-12-2000
"
"scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the  marks might mean "
"you! You might try over The Hill or across The Water."" By this he meant that the "
"goblins-as I was about to tell you."" "
     'When?' said Pippin. 'Have  you a  guess?  For I saw the  beacons  last 
majesty and glory  of the Captains of the West. And those  that were deepest  
"Sheila-kathryn Tamlett,4883051476632911,07-08-1984
"
"Lynnet Wandtke,4017959973769,22-09-1985
"
"Loella Febre,4017953805012450,20-03-1990
"
"are. I hope you will forgive them for bothering you."" "
the  very  pass  where  the  goblins  had  captured  them before. But  they came  to  that 
quivering. 
"     'He is dead,' said Jomer, 'but he bade me say farewell to  Jowyn dearer  "
"eyes  still  burned  with  a bright  light,  glinting  as  he  gazed at  the "
"sun was down,  and  a cool  pale evening was quietly fading  into night.  He "
"Chief of the D®nedain in the North, and few are now left  of that folk.' "
saying between the efforts: 'Where's that dratted creature?' 
"Dal Salvidge,4306487963107,23-03-1989
"
"     Then the blood left Beregond's face, and he was stricken to  the  heart "
on to a last effort. 
"half fearful, blindfold, not knowing where they were; and no one spoke. "
"Thrbin his  son,  but not Thrbin to Thorin. It was taken  with  torment from "
was little speech and  no laughter  in any of  the boats. Each member of the 
"     'You have my pity,' said Thjoden. 'And I do not send you from my  side. "
"comes down from it - unless we go back. We can't climb up westward, or climb "
The drum-beats faded. 
"all now. He can't  be looking for food up here, not unless there's some kind "
"there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we "
lot more. Lately it's been getting worse. Often they beat 'em now.' 
"Emyle MacCague,4017953658218,11-03-1976
"
perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth. 
and came  through another smaller door into a sort of veranda propped on wooden 
and  it  is  also  the  heart  of  Thorin.  He  values  it  above  a  river  of  gold.  I  give  it  to 
"     'You  said  I  might  hear something to my advantage, I  believe,' said "
searching eyes. 
"     Such was the dark Dunharrow, the work of long -forgotten men. Their name "
"Frodo's feet, wringing his hands and  squeaking. 'Not this way, master! ' he "
"     Sam went  to him and kissed his hand. 'Then the sooner we're rid of it, "
face looked as if  she was in the throes of thinking out a  really  crushing 
"last through years uncounted, and you  shall be summoned once again ere  the "
the anvil. For now men leaped from the ships to the quays of the Harlond and 
come on an errand from Cnrdan the Shipwright. There  was also a  strange Elf 
"down  in  full. At  last one, a  tall young  fellow, came out  from  the  trees and bowed "
But a  fine guard you keep in the valley:  he  was up here a day  before all 
     The red glare over Mordor  died  away. The twilight deepened  as  great 
 
"the rising  sun.  Over  the low hills  the horns were  sounding. Behind him, "
"till all fell, and do deeds of song on the fields of Pelennor, though no man "
"him, and  then hearing Frodo's cry  he ran back again, weeping  and cursing.  "
plan. Most  likely you  saw  it  some  time  ago  and have been  laughing  at him; but I 
"least  an  adventure. The  dwarves  ate  and  ate,  and  talked  and  talked,  and  time  got "
"     `I do not know which to hope,' said  Boromir grimly: `that Gandalf will "
"Jose O'Scollain,4041596227074,29-10-1998
"
"     Gandalf did  not move.  And in that  very moment,  away  behind in some "
"thoughts, and forgetting his peril he cried aloud: 'I'm coming, Mr. Frodo!' "
"when  goblins  came  to  grab  him,  there  was  a  terrible  flash  like  lightning  in  the "
"it ran from the  mountains' feet  and so back again, enclosing in its  fence "
"     Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as "
"Louise Moth,4041379783776199,19-07-1978
"
with  jagged  tops  and edges outlined  hard and  menacing against the fiery 
the  ground. But one  arm hung  limp and seemed to be  bleeding;  the  other  
`AII I needed was some food and a little rest.' 
""
anywhere else!' 
caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running  down the slope  some way off 
ten times and more than ten times  their  match  would ring them in a sea of 
whithersoever you wished quicker  than  I?  And this I also say: you are our 
"histories and legends  of long ago,  of Elves  and Men and the good and evil  "
"afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold and "
""
""
"all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.' "
"     'Well, yes,  to speak in courtesy, yes,' said Pippin. 'But no more than "
"right,' he said thoughtfully. 'No, after all I believe your plan is probably "
"they  followed  his  head,  but  they  seemed  no  nearer  to  the  end  of  the  search when "
"crawling  on all  fours,  like  an  erring  dog  called  to  heel. He had   a "
darts  and other gear of war. Upon  a stake in  the  middle was set a  great 
King of Rohan came down out of the hills. 
"There was a purse in it, as big as a bag to Bilbo. ""Ha!"" thought he warming to his "
"marched on southwards. To the  right the Mountains of Gondor  glowed, "
Ferry is east from Woodhall;  but the hard road curves away to the left  -you  
"     `Come,  Mr. Frodo!  ' said Sam.  'Don't look at  them!  Gollum says  we "
 
desires to return to the hills under cover of night.' 
than Gandalf. Come in! Come  in!  The same rooms as  - before? They're free. 
friends. What can you tell us?' 
"Sam, though, that gave you away this time, but Gandalf himself!' "
"there   were  tall  strong  Ents,   clean-limbed  and  smooth-skinned   like "
"is  the entrance to the tunnel.' He did  not speak its name:  Torech  Ungol, "
will do with you! ' 
choose a course that  proves ill for my city. So I will not  decide in haste 
"between sleep and waking, until forgetfulness came over him. "
"conditions, I presume?' "
"####-     His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster. "
"Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you  well enough, if I may "
"     'The  heirs  of Elendil do not forget all  things past,'  said Strider; "
"####-     'Well, now I have at  least some  notion  of where we are!' said Merry. "
"feeling  impatient,  hmm,  eh? Well, I  am  afraid  that  you  must  not get "
"Mark Galliver,4017953941010,18-04-2001
"
"could  stay  here  for  ever,  if  only  I  could wake up and  find  this beastly  tunnel was "
"much today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops,  "
"the quiet  and beloved Shire.  He  stared down at the hateful Road,  leading "
"hear  me.  Cheer  up  Bilbo!""  He  had  forgotten  or  had  never  heard  about  dragons' "
"cook,  if  I have  a mind. And  I have.  You needn't watch me.  Go and catch  "
"Barron Cowterd,4041370345332878,03-11-1992
"
"primly  towards  the  red  light,  I  don't  suppose  even  a  weasel  would  have  stirred  a "
"I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now  that "
far-sighted men upon the  Citadel could  discern little clearly out upon the 
"the  road  towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set, "
they would fill with goods they had brought to be taken back up the stream to the 
     And Aragorn said:  'Now I  know  what you bear. Bear it still for  me a  
crash. The other ran off across the valley and disappeared. 
"     'Wholesome verily,' said Aragorn. 'And now,  dame, if you love the Lord "
"Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Orcs were mustered, and the wild men of the "
"Hetty Lively,4041598845073374,03-04-1985
"
"at last by Jomer,  the Third Marshal  of the Mark, who dismounted and fought "
     But Imrahil said to Jomer: 'Is it  thus that we speak to our kings? Yet 
"he had no better uses for: he would have them driven to her hole, and  report  "
####-bow sang. For a moment all was still. 
"angry,  and  to  show  them  he was  not  frightened  of  them-though of course he was, "
"'To the Gate, master  says! Yes, he says so.  And  good Smjagol does what he "
"aimlessly about, and glummer and glummer they became. "
"for a good homely meal, `something hot out of the pot'. "
     And there they brew a beer so brown  
"Moot really begins.  I will come  and see you again, and tell you how things "
"Sharai Caws,4041377885305636,08-05-1986
"
thought could yet  bring any help to Samwise  Hamfast's son; he was  utterly 
"as he was and far from a fire, but the bottle helped him to do that, and he actually "
"now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as steep as a ladder , "
     on journey long without a word. 
"brow,  and the  dour-handed D®nedain, Rangers of the North,  leading a great "
either  side  in  a  sort  of  darkened  green  glimmer.  Occasionally  a  slender  beam  of 
not be seen on the  road  - by anyone. I am  sick of my  doings being noticed  
go that way! The Withywindle valley is said to be  the  queerest part of the 
"Kamilah Fontell,4041593974496,18-08-1996
"
We must away ere break of day 
"     The retreat became a rout. Already men were breaking away, flying  wild  "
"Rebeka Crasford,4121479566681559,25-05-1987
"
troop of heavy-armed uruks from Barad-dyr charged into the Durthang line and 
will lie open to you eastward that have long been closed.' 
ready to ride  north from the City. Then the kings of Gondor and Rohan  went 
"us, and its hour had already been determined before ever the travellers left "
     so nice for feet! 
"passed over him unheard. Then the Wood-elves had come to him, and bound him, "
to the turret-door and stepped inside. It opened into darkness. But soon his 
"you  any  more  of  it,  though  he  went  on  a  good  deal  longer  than  this.  It  certainly "
     Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow! 
before  his  arms  gave  way.  He  loosed  Dori's  ankles  with  a  gasp  and  fell  onto  the 
"they had to do just what Bilbo suggested, because it was obviously impossible for "
special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with him among his gear?' 
"himself, on  the  spur of  a very  awkward moment.  It did what he wanted  any way. "
"Agustin Turfin,4017957049445715,25-04-1981
"
"Tommy Lassey,4224523748558,17-11-1984
"
"     'Courage is found in unlikely places,' said  Gildor. 'Be  of good hope!  "
"respected person at the Green Dragon Inn, Bywater, at II a.m. sharp. Trusting "
come   on  somebody!'  he  cried.  `Tell  Captain  Shagrat  that  the  great 
"others. ""We can do nothing."" "
You hardly feel any weight when you put it on.' 
"made the journey, before all was brought safe to the southern landing. "
where they  had been hours before. Yet on the whole they had worked steadily 
Yet feet that wandering have gone 
"     There  remained,  of course, the  ancient tradition concerning the high "
"Hamlen Willicott,4041377284388316,07-08-1996
"
and shape as the door above. Through it peeps the hobbit's little head. Before him 
"Mireille Warret,4017950387088163,20-08-1988
"
""
"     'Not enough, I deem,' said Denethor. 'It is  there that the first  blow "
"rather above my head, and  he  said that if I had  the cheek to make  verses "
"away that bow, Master Elf!' "
country under a swift sunrise. 
even  made  alliances  with  them.  But  they  had  a  special  grudge  against  Thorin's 
"Wait Ratter,4041590522566283,15-12-1989
"
"approaching, slowly. He woke and  found that the others were speaking softly "
"Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on  the outside of the circle, "
"     'We  will swear to  do what he wants,  yes, yess,  said  Gollum,  still "
     'And let us have  food and drink!' cried Tom. 'Long tales are  thirsty. 
suppose?' 
"was  your companion and you have spoken with Elrond, the Edain,  the Fathers "
more corn at all. They're always a -hammering and a -letting out a smoke and a  
"referred to.  North,  South, East,  and  West;  and  these again each into a  "
"     'But we must be swift,' said Gimli. 'He would not wish us to linger. We "
talk  
 
"Smjagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.' "
needed you. I did not know what to do without you.' 
"their  own  shares  in  the  treasure  (which  they  quite  regarded  as  theirs,  in  spite  of "
not yet bring from  the  field; for seven of the king's knights  had  fallen 
"Lorne Prantl,4330790360975,01-03-1987
"
"     As well set your boot to the mountain's root, "
"called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift -falling streams.  "
"world is yet young! And merry be all your folk!"" "
"is  his province. He  has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of their "
"many ways, and  I was at a loss. But  it  seemed  to me that one  or two had "
must be heavy!' He smote the hilt of his sword. 
"     'I thought, sir, that you would tell me my duties.' "
"he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of  Sting "
the North.' 
"     'I don't like this at all,' panted Sam  just behind.  'Snow's all right "
"perceived. Victory  cannot be  achieved by  arms, whether  you sit  here  to "
"Joseph Bearns,4041593758962044,15-02-1977
"
do a mischief up there before the morning.' 
"rope,  slipped  down  over  the wall,  and was  gone. He  had  about  five  hours  before "
'Go at once!  Ever since that night at Bree we have been  a nuisance to you. 
"     `You  remember?'  said  Frodo,   speaking  his  thought  aloud  in  his "
     It  was  just at  this  time that  Gandalf  reappeared  after his  long 
"from  it  any  longer,  or when  he was  very,  very,  hungry, and  tired of  fish. Then he "
"Carma Tenpenny,4041371184516,12-04-1983
"
that storm: he must weather it or crack. 
"at  the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell  me the end of the  "
Are you Mr. Butterbur?' 
"country crawling with enemies, even if we did get down.' "
"     'As he ever has judged,' said Aragorn.  'Good and  ill have not changed "
"his brother  Boromir - whom Pippin had liked from  the  first,  admiring the "
That  is  the effect  that dragon-talk has on the inexperienced. Bilbo of course ought 
"are in peril as the world now stands,  those are my care. And for my part, I "
peace shall come again.  Yet I do not believe  that  the world about us will 
 
     'Is that where you found him?' asked Frodo. 
"looking  really scared. 'But why can't you stay here  quiet for  a  bit, Mr. "
"Roderich McCurtin,4712214390052,28-10-2000
"
"Mountains of Lune, and this was just the East End. "
"days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed "
they  sailed  from  Cair Andros  down Anduin to  Osgiliath; and  there  they  
The errand must not fail.' 
"It shall  all  go up in a  great fire, and all shall be  ended. Ash! Ash and "
"Pippin tore them down. There was no beer and very little food, but with what "
""
"wars, and assailed many who defied  them. Yet with some they have afterwards "
escape from the orcs and from Gollum. 
"on, guide me round the corners!' "
"that. You see our dad Mr. Peregrin, he's never had no truck with this Lotho, "
picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire!  
     'All ready to start?' he said as Pippin ran up. 'We must be getting off 
"fact, lived quietly in  Middle-earth for  many  long years before other folk  "
"raiment was taken off, but folded and set aside with honour; and clean linen  "
cut  down to your  height and  newly  shod. They  are made of the fair  tree 
with  a  mighty  jump.  But  it  did  not  reach  the  other  side  in  safety. Thorin was  the 
"     'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,' said Aragorn. 'But "
"     The road now led eastward straight across the valley, which was at that "
"Germain Mussington,4041378380158,16-01-1995
"
     Still round the corner we may meet 
"     A sudden weight smote him and he crashed forward, tearing the backs  of "
"remember, said one of them,  that the name Baggins  must not be mentioned. I "
running stream of musical sounds.  
"     'But you can give it  up,  stop Shirriffing, if it has  stopped being a  "
"is long,  long since we  met by stock  or by  stone, A  vanimar,  vanimblion "
"we  will bear  Faramir, Steward of Gondor, to  a place where he can sleep in "
"great flag-stones, and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked "
"Salim Hamsson,4017950929581105,16-09-1977
"
"after the manner of the kings of old, they say. But I see that it is not so, "
"drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it,  if you  will. For you know  where it "
"     Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror, for as he looked it "
"bowstring,  turning the blade and tossing up both sword and a rm. Three times "
"Gus Cleynaert,4017956561517323,11-02-2001
"
river. But  defenders   and  foes alike gave up  the battle and fled  when we 
"fiercely. 'If it don't let them go,  I'll  have it down,  if  I have to gnaw "
"it were heavily burdened,  and it  seemed to me  as it passed under  my gaze "
of the face grew livid green. 
life as I will?' 
"     and he shall plant it in the high places, "
"any squirrel could.  You wi ll not have us  slay wild  beasts for no purpose, "
fall hardest. And for that reason Mithrandir came  hither in such haste. For 
Bilbo's  heart  jumped  into  his mouth. He  gave  a  terrific  squirm. Buttons burst 
     'Which way shall we go? ' asked Boromir. 
"to war together; but if you seek the  Paths of the Dead, then our parting is "
"Evangelia Pues,4017952060190621,30-06-1999
"
"him till now, save Anborn here, once  at dusk yesterevening. But now  he has "
"could deal with you in the  Dark Tower, slowly.  Don't shudder! If  you will "
Phial of Galadriel. 
"don't flounder, or  you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of  the side, "
"     'But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc,' said Aragorn. 'They "
camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.' 
"     `Smjagol!  ' said  Frodo,  trying  to  call. 'Smjagol! '  But his voice "
"rear. Merry felt more  like unneeded baggage than  ever, and he wondered, if "
of growth.' 
"Not in  high place.""  "
"had come to him. The edge  of the black knife had snicked his arm, and  then "
####-     'So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures 
"that nasty clockless, timeless hole?"" "
"Alison Matovic,4017951587419,11-04-1996
"
"then on under an archway of trees, through  which they saw  the  shimmer  of "
"     They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. Butterbur with "
"east, though  they must have actually walked twenty miles  or  more. As  the "
"were very  high up. And if  they are Black Riders same as  before, then they "
""
the barrier wall. 
"Lauralee Forton,4041596330763616,09-07-1989
"
"help  him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco  Boffin, and "
"found  a  tree  into  which  they  could  not  climb,  a  large  pine  standing  at  the  very "
"     Riding over  the hills,  and eating  their fill, the warm  sun and  the "
"Ferrell Lawrenson,4041592884977,10-07-1996
"
"and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: "
"     At last they came out of  shadow to the seventh gate,  and the warm sun "
"####-his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled  with it. "
"     When  his eyes were in  turn uncovered, Frodo looked up  and caught his "
"large chamber,  with other smaller  doors  at the far end,  and a hearth and "
"must not stray outside until the sun is up, on your peril."" "
     Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you 
     They  now went  on again. Before long Gimli spoke.  He had keen eyes in 
"us not speak at all! I  stand  upon some dreadful  brink,  and it is utterly "
"missed a lot, seemingly.' "
"Petrina Cardillo,4017958706038,28-06-1978
"
"was very dark, a  cloudy  night. They moved at a great speed as soon as they "
"were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer On the face of the River.  It "
the Hill  with  a pony and some mighty big  bags and a couple  of  chests. I 
""
"     The leader looked round. He was trapped. But he was not scared, not now "
     entwife. 
     `No! ' said Frodo. `But do not wander from your road. What of the third 
""
"Denethor. 'If I had this thing  now in  the deep  vaults of this citadel, we "
"their land.  If they  do, Tooks hunt  'em. Tooks shot three for prowling and "
doubted  no  longer. Balin was  the most  puzzled  of  all;  but  everyone  said  it was  a 
"     My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again;  and my  dear  Tooks and "
"####-of the South;  there  is a sea -tang in it, faint  though it be.  The morning "
stay upstairs and look out of  the windows.' 
"     'I will keep  Jomer and ten Riders,'  said the  king. 'They shall  ride "
 
"Enemy, and no longer wait upon him  for the move. See my friends, when I had "
"""I am too fat for such fly-walks,"" he said. ""I should turn dizzy and tread on my "
"the outset, whi le some  may not possess the earlier book. For such readers a  "
`Ninnyhammers!  ' he said. `Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied to a  
"shores, or Gondor of the D®nedain was built; and now  they had vanished, and "
keeping close to the wall and feeling it with his left hand. 
"start?-and here you are having breakfast, or whatever you call  it, at half past  ten! "
"     So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle, "
"and intact,  under pain  of death for every member  of  the guard, until  He "
     And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree. 
"Eustacia Tupman,4313166191281,04-04-1975
"
"mightier hands had wielded it, would have dealt that foe a wound  so bitter, "
"     Adventures of  Five  Hobbits. The Tale  of the Great  Ring, compiled by "
"     'I have lost it, Bilbo dear,' said Frodo. 'I got rid of it, you know.' "
"     `But still we will not sit idle  and  let Him do all as He would,' said "
####-going to battle together.' 
"captured  as long as possible.  So we must still go northwards, I think, and "
"overwhelmed him.  'The quest  has failed Sam. Even if we get out of here, we "
"We must away, ere break of day,  "
"     'Thank  you, my dear fellow!' said Bilbo. 'That really is a  very great "
"While  all  these  thoughts  were  passing  through  his  mind,  the  elves  being  very "
"to strengthen it, as I have said.' "
that  gazed back  east  straight  to  the  Window  of  the  Eye  in Sauron's 
"'The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it "
and grew hot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown 
"Zonda Gurley,4041597160142,29-04-1982
"
"half south, and the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the "
not drink of it! It is icy cold.' 
the others a dread fell at  the mention of that name. Even to the hobbits it 
"through hillside slopes, or leaped over a stream upon a wide shapely arch of "
Bilbo  pinched  himself  and  slapped  himself;  he  gripped  on  his  little  sword;  he 
"spring they found close to the forest-gate, and unpack the ponies. They distributed "
"Nancey Camps,4434136036016,08-10-1991
"
 
"be, to the Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it. Do you deny "
"     'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. `I can walk. Put me down! ' "
something good. 
came  not to  the ship where  Amroth her  lover waited for  her. But  in the 
spoke true! What hope have we without you?  ' 
"wide right across  the way, and  it was black, or  looked  it  in  the gloom. It was well "
reluctantly.  I  have known strong  warriors of  the Big  People  who  would 
"     'When that happens to  a  tree,  you find that  some have  bad  hearts.  "
     `Because  they are real horses; just as the black robes are real  robes 
"the darkness  seemed  to clear, and  through the opening could be seen, high "
"Lavena Roloff,4017951225317,04-10-1999
"
"sniffed  more  than  once  at  what  he  called  ""all  this dwarvish  racket,"" as  they went "
up; but I  may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds  me very much of 
     `Ah! Who would? ' said Sam. `Elves are wonderful folk. It looks  a  bit 
expect  folk  to stop here  for ever  just  to be et by you and Bert. You've et a village 
the rest fled in terror of his wrath. The Company swept  past them  and took  
chain and  clutched  the Ring. But Sam did  not put  it  on; for even as  he 
"end, but it would be  a pity  to waste  all my  preparations. It would quite "
was that of Elven -song and spoke of things little known on Middle-earth. 
"snails have!"" "
"Talya Cawdron,4016016434013,06-01-1976
"
notched. 
"the  dream went on: he  heard whispers, and saw the two pale points of light  "
sent messengers  at  once  to  the Gate; but  they  found no gold or payment. Arrows 
"####-     'At the least we will do that,' said Thjoden. 'But I myself am new-come "
canopy with great billowing  edges flecked with dazzling light. The sun went 
Above it was a  dark blank  space between the top and the  low  arch of  the 
of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind. 
"and what use  has  it been? Naught  to  make a fire with, for  a start;  and "
"You wait till it has been cleaned and redecorated!"" "
"     As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow  became steadily more "
edge  against  the  sky was  broken  into many bare points like teeth  of  a  
for some more quiet talk?' 
"our  last  chance.  If  this  is  found out, goodness knows where  the king will put you "
Where the berry swells and fills 
"sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in "
over the River.' 
"asked Jomer. 'We must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and  I doubt not the "
"the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.' "
"     `I don't know how you can be so sure,' said Sam. `Why! You can't see to "
Aragorn's own horse that they  had  brought from the North; Roheryn  was his 
will know.' 
"shaped with  knives,  reared up more than twice the  height of  Boromir; but "
wishing  that he was really coming  here to settle down in quiet retirement. 
and piled spears bristling like  thickets of new-planted trees. Now  all the 
"nonsense, and all wide of my mark.' "
"far shore; and many of  the  smaller  craft were  ablaze.  But the Haradrim, "
"girdle from the west and wound snakelike about the Mountain, until before it "
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence. 
     'Reasons for leaving you can see from your  windows.' answered Gandalf. 
"wondered  what  had  happened,  and  what  was  going  to  happen,  and  whether  they "
"     They woke  together, hand in  hand.  Sam was  almost fresh,  ready  for  "
to Ents.' 
"Eal Britner,4017951197104364,13-12-1975
"
"yet  before I ""come of age"", as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about "
"expression, and the same green flicker. "
"see the old fellow again,' he said. 'I wonder how he is getting on?' "
"""They're dead now, I'll warrant,"" said the first. "
To  the  end  of  his  days  Bilbo  could  never  remember  how  he  found  himself 
like 
"Salvidor Shenley,4041593903727,11-12-1981
"
swift strokes swept  the heads  off two of his opponents.  Grishnbkh stepped 
"upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown  of many boughs,  "
higher and higher above their heads.  
wondered  what would  come  of  it. All through  the winter  he remained  as 
"Simone Simoneton,4041370475266235,29-07-1975
"
Dead;  and no  fear upon  that way was so present as the fear for what might  
me  from  the beginning: why when  Boromir had fallen  were the Orcs content 
alone and pass on!' he thought. 
"great  monsters were  unfought, and  stood  like towers of defence,  and the "
"Biddie Vardie,4041379344443,23-09-1979
"
     `Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has become more 
"Cristie Logesdale,4017958600892,26-06-1987
"
"     Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vaster and more "
"the  villages nearest  the mountains.  If  their plan had been carried out,  there would "
"     'Hoo,  come  now!'  said  Treebeard.   'Hoom, hm, ah  well.'  He paused, "
"passed  swiftly  over the plain, and on the next day  in the  afternoon they "
strong places of stone before the Shadow came.' 
"believe it! If you get off alive, you will be lucky."" "
"of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on faltering feet "
perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light. 
"Jefferey Fevier,4017953682127,12-08-1978
"
away. 
the  Hedge  through  the stems of trees  that were already thick about them. 
journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! ' 
I miss  my meal at noon. Can't you think of some  names  now?  Or put it off 
"Gandalf,  whose long labours against  Sauron come at last to their test. But "
bottom.  There  were  gullies  that  they  could  almost  leap  over;  but  very  deep  with 
"""May it soon cleave goblins once again!"" "
 
Or  better than both:  for they are steadier a nd keep their  minds on things 
"your part is in the house. But when  the men have died in battle and honour,  "
"     'Goldberry!' he cried. 'My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We have "
"lived and magical race, and this might even be one of those that were alive then, a "
"Dragons may  not  have much  real  use  for  all  their wealth,  but  they  know  it  to  an "
     In the falling dusk they  scrambled out of the pit and slowly  threaded 
"all knowledge, and the  Three  were  released from  its dominion. But now in "
"Trish Hawkett,4041379324742,03-01-1992
"
"he did sleep, he had very nasty dreams. He dreamed that a crack in the wall at the "
storm; and  beyond them the  green and  tangled valley  ran up into the long  
"what can a dozen do against so many?' "" "
""
     Then the Riders of the King's House  upon white horses rode round about 
"Allianora Cakebread,4979384114862201,04-10-1992
"
     'Hold it up!' said Gandalf. 'And look closely!' 
would happen to them without him; for he had not had time to tell the dwarves all 
dive into the falls.  The rocks  have such  teeth  there  as would  slay you  
"thereupon Jomer rode  up  in haste, and with him  came the  knights  of  the "
snivelling  and snarling. He thought  he was misunderstood and ill-used. But 
"he  has plotted  your  ruin, wearing the  mask of Friendship,  until  he was "
     With a  violent heave Sam rose up.  At once  he drew his  sword; but he 
"End, uninvited but not unexpected. "
"the travellers, and of their resolve to go to Cirith Ungol,  his voice fell, "
 
"discovered the bodies of five more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and "
"will not  sound  so ill,  and  Telcontar I will be and all  the heirs  of my "
on  the  ropes  which  pulled  up  the  portcullis  at  the  water-gate  so  as  to  let  out  the 
     Galadriel laughed  with a sudden clear laugh. `Wise the  Lady Galadriel 
under the twilight of Lurien that we  love; for  we  put the thought of  all 
so lavishly  as on this  occasion; but it was  not a bad system. Actually in 
"of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and creepers. Behind them stood low "
 
"pipe-weed in his gardens in  the days of Isengrim the Second, about the year  "
"not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.' "
give thought  to what comes after that. To  do the job as you put it  -- what 
"now.  Draw  it  back  gently.""  Fili  hauled  the  rope  back  slowly,  and  after  a  while "
""
were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like 
"Ingaborg Pettingall,4017951418094,17-04-1986
"
"     `Loose us! Loose us! '  he said.  `The  cord hurts us, yes it does,  it "
"had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at "
"Averil Gutch,4041599729992614,27-09-1990
"
orc-band?  ' 
"breakfast! I wonder how many breakfasts, and other meals, we have missed inside "
"hall is  lessened. You have ridden through the night,  and the morning wears "
he could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all its strength. The horn that he 
     Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes  still  falling out of the dark to be 
Orthanc yet? For I do  not suppose that he will think you  have improved the 
learn the art before their letters (which  many never reach):  but Sam was a  
"mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer dull-witted, but  cunning and armed "
deeper than the night. The Company stared in wonder. 
"Clementia Grieves,4041599638811103,19-07-1976
"
""
your good faith. Do not fail.' 
could be seen except from the southern shoulders of the Mountain. 
"Hyatt Pinar,4041373797500166,17-08-1978
"
"     'Lo! lords and knights and  men of valour unashamed, kings and princes,  "
"riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still  far behind, but gaining "
     Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn 
"Frodo returned  to him, and he remembered that the other  orc  had gone back "
"with flame, and the field  is full of foes.  But all seem drawn off  to  the "
"night up on top there above the arch,  and it was cold and  damp and we  did "
"they halted, weary, for they had walked  seven leagues or more  from Henneth "
"minds without his aid.  Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call "
"     'I  am troubled in mind, lord,'  he said, standing by the king's horse. "
     They  ate  and drank; and they  talked now of  Gondor and its  ways and 
no 
"ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of "
"Bettye Raven,4324963984927,21-07-1981
"
"""Where are  the Eagles?"" he asked Gandalf  that evening, as he  lay wrapped  in "
"from Rath Dnnen the  crown of Edrnur the last king, whose days passed in the "
questions. They still had a long way to walk before them. Up slope and down dale 
     The night  passed without  Gollum showing  so  much as  a shadow again. 
"with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us? ' "
old and wise. 
"The time will not  be long. In what is left, let all who fight  the Enemy in "
"Creight Barsham,4263434775078,30-05-1976
"
"men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till "
"     'Neat work, Bill,' said Sam, meaning the pony. "
"""Wrong!"" said Bilbo, who had lost his some time ago. ""Last guess!"" "
relieved by the excellence of the beer). 
"well.  He  wished he could cover  the  hole,  if only with a blanket, but he "
"stay and have a bite with us, we would be pleased!' "
course  they saw a beaten  path that  wound  its way under the  feet of  the 
whip-weal. 
     Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing. 
his reputation as a lettered man): 
"Massimo Rowat,4017953507589,11-08-1978
"
""
in its straight sure  flight and level course:  now and again it cut its way 
"that  moment  about  the  Arkenstone,  I  don't  know.  The  mere  fleeting  glimpses  of "
"had  stopped  talking  and  shut  their  eyes,  he  kept  on  muttering  and  chuckling  to "
the  brink  of  a  deep  dark  subterranean  lake.  The  sword was  hardly  shining  at  all. 
""
"could be seen. Still as stones they stood, staring, waiting for they did not "
"     'It is also called kingsfoil,' said Aragorn; 'and maybe you  know it by "
scattered piercing white sparks all among the goblins. 
"a Council, as soon as you are  well enough. At the  moment  I will only  say "
"is  now  called  the Black Pit,  Moria in the Elvish  tongue.  Yonder stands "
Enemy 
"pupil opened on a pit, a window into nothing. "
"     They now hurried forward again,  delighted with the thought of climbing "
"hazel-thickets. Sam  was  silent,  deep in his memories. Presently he became "
"     'Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said Frodo,  'so I have "
there among  them  hoary ash-trees. and  giant oaks  just putting  out their 
"Merry, he ran  forward and embraced  the newcomer. 'Halbarad!' he said.  'Of "
""
"Craig Trays,4017958262974,01-05-2001
"
rooms  where the  sick were tended  Gandalf told of the deeds  of  Jowyn and 
"Joela Dripps,4041375183878,02-10-1991
"
""
""
"Mavra Ibberson,4041379709116,03-02-1991
"
"but his heart  was heavy, and he looked  out  over the  walls  eastward. And "
"`which perhaps  you may  tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I "
memory glad and honourable to the end of your days.' 
on his own. It's time he was his own master now.' 
"     `It  is close on  ten leagues hence to the east -shore of Anduin,'  said "
"Engracia Pagitt,4041592927389097,06-01-1995
"
and the miles are long from Edoras.' 
in the spring.  I have often kept watch  on  the borders of the Shire in the 
"####-on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind "
"of  trees were  glistening, and every twig  was dripping; the grass was grey "
"them, cut sheer down  as if by  a  knife stroke.  They could  go  no further "
"     `Just what I sa id myself,' said Bilbo. 'But never mind about looks. You  "
"     'The road goes on  for ever,' said Pippin; 'but I can't without a rest. "
"Eva Bolles,4768100384443,08-10-1995
"
"Paddie Monckman,4017951765463473,18-08-1991
"
"Thorvald Reims,4041379245074993,07-04-1981
"
Muil ran from North to South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of 
"finish it,' said Sam. "
"noble faces and sad. Many faces  proud and fair, and weeds  in their  silver  "
"Up you get and fall in, or I'll have your numbers and report you.' "
"Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain "
"""That remains to be seen,"" said Gandalf. ""Is there any more writing?"" "
"weariness. At once  his  enemies  leapt forward. Up  came the Orcs, yelling,  "
beginning to think it's time we got  a sight of that Fiery Mountain  and saw 
they return. Come! The  light  is growing fast. Let  us look first and guess 
here; but I only remember it  vaguely. I remember clearest  that there was a  
"thought that came to him, he drew slowly out the phial of Galadriel and held "
"Brittan Seeborne,4041372477158,17-07-1980
"
the Lady.' 
"knelt,  and said: 'The last  Steward of Gondor begs  leave to  surrender his "
knocked. 
"Major Zupone,4041373034578,16-08-1975
"
""
     When  the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves were to 
"be  both  kinder  and  more alarming, merrier and more solemn than before, I "
""
Then he charged.  No onslaught more fierce was ever seen in the savage world 
"if you accustomed yourselves to stepping  in and out,  here where there is a  "
"looking for it, while Ugl®k is busy: he probably wants it for himself.' Cold "
in hatred and contempt: they would not long have survived even as slaves. 
Rohan.  I do not trust  that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows 
heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once  did they 
"ten  remained. Fili  and Kili  had  fallen  defending  him with  shield  and  body,  for  he "
with me. Don't tell anybody else! But I should  feel happier  if I knew  you  
"and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly: "
"was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on  a dark heath, "
"Kili  and  Fili  rushed  for  their  bags  and  brought  back  little  fiddles; Dori, Nori, "
"     beyond all towers strong and high, "
"opening at the right, it ran towards him. It was no more than six paces from "
before?' 
"I should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They are small, but they "
"Stephine Cloake,4017957657210096,22-11-2000
"
"Deina Maffei,4017952000347,07-12-1985
"
"Emmi Stoite,4983026575425143,23-05-1977
"
Kings' Norbury  were covered with grass. Yet the Hobbits  still said of wild 
"flaming sword across the darkened land, and armies flocking  to  his call as "
reasons.  
his. Yet he is great among the Wise.  He  is the  chief of  my order and the 
     In vain men shook  their fists at the pitiless foes that swarmed before 
him and he  is deep in  all our counsels. It is perilous to study too deeply 
"The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of rage when he looked at it, and all "
"Jobina Langshaw,4041595754813493,25-12-1976
"
me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?' 
"half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.' "
"and a long brown beard; his eyes  were blue and bright, and his face was red "
     the swords shining in the South -kingdom. 
"Cary Marden,4389075416548,25-01-1975
"
"""I  always meant  to  see you  all  safe  (if possible) over  the mountains,""  said  the "
"was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glinting stars,  "
one  day soon. That is the only  way big armies can come. But away down west  
     'Where is it?' 
"     'Go!' said Aragorn. 'But  keep what honour you may, and do not run! And "
"Barnie Sulley,4017954313100944,04-10-1992
"
"Alexi Meekings,4041375413267955,06-08-1989
"
coming  down  the  river  to  Lake-town.  These were  inspired  largely  by  the Master 
D®nedain of Arnor;  and the Lord  of  Dol Amroth  shall rule the City  until  
"heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet "
     between the Mountains and the Sea. 
"old Flourdumpling, old Will Whitfoot the Mayor,  first,  and they've taken a  "
""
"Gregor Marchington,4439964351514245,20-07-1980
"
up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!' 
gazing  for  a while  at  the Gate  and  its  defences  soon  followed  them. That  day  the 
with light. Not the imprisoned moonlight welling through the marble walls of 
"Camey Bullingham,4041597795158813,31-01-1975
"
barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?' 
away!' He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness. 
"pouring in slowly but steadily, like the rising  tide through breaches in  a  "
"the look of him."" "
"day is over, and all other ruffians'. The Dark Tower has  fallen, and  there "
"close  behind, closer even than I feared. And well is it that not until this "
"Cassaundra Skace,4017957467541938,29-05-1983
"
"the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching endlessly over the trees;  but "
""
Ape!' he snarled fiercely.  'You ought to know that they're the apple of the 
"or  three together are to go openly over the land,  by day or night, when it "
and many  herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots 
"desired death for all others, mind and body, and for herself a glut of life. "
"rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!"" "
not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir. Before dawn was 
"become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others. Yet "
"squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was foretelling  that more  and more people "
     Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff. 
fire and smoke he took up the staff  of his stewardship that lay at his feet 
"     `I'm not going down those stairs again,' growled Snaga, `be you captain "
"     hearth and high-seat, and the hallowed places, "
"you then,  and  what had you  to do  with  him?  Be swift, for  the  Sun  is "
do with another.' 
"Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think "
"####-     Pippin glanced at  it  as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful, "
"     'I  wouldn't,' said Frodo.  `I am content.  And I don't  miss Gandalf's "
great  days  their realm did not reach up  Anduin beyond the Emyn  Muil; but 
the tunnel before the orcs got you. How long ago that wa s I don't know. More 
your report?  ' 
"""There was a terrible storm; the stone-giants were out hurling rocks, and at the "
and the crack of stone. 
would never again be found in Middle-earth. 
But now he simply was not there at all! 
"Pattin Lifton,4017957422504922,21-05-1994
"
"     'Name  the  terms,'  said Gandalf steadily,  but  those nearby  saw the "
     'Hinder me? Thou fool. No living man may hinder me!' 
"gathering them together. Its first moves, the first feelers of its strength, "
     'Westu Thjoden hbl!' cried Jomer. 'It  is a joy to us to see you return 
could  be entered  by  a great  crack  on the  side  away from the road. The 
""
"####-abroad at all, poor lass; but as I hadn't spoken, she couldn't say so. And I "
"""So  much  for  joy,  Thorin  Oakenshield.  You  may  go  back  to  your  halls  in "
"is the custom in the West, if you wi sh to be answered?' "
"     `No, no! Not that way! ' wailed Smjagol. "
it's different.' 
"trees of  Fangorn  were awake, and the  forest was rising, marching over the "
"     It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts beside, "
has no power over him. He is  his own master.  But he  cannot alter  the Ring 
"Faustine Undrell,4041594225401,07-11-1984
"
"Bilbo's  first successful adventure  was  heartening. The sun, too, was warm "
####-     'Go on with you! ' said Sam. `Let's get it over! ' 
"they let them in. On the night of the  fight, I  mean. And that was after we "
Over Hill and Under Hill 
stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and invisible. 
though  he  don't  tell nobody what cause  he has to hurry.  But there's  no 
####-     'But the Sun at any  rate must peep in sometimes.' said Merry. 'It does 
handsome does we say. Now's a chance to show your quality.' 
"isn't the crown of all!' he said. 'Strider, or I'm still asleep!' "
It was full morning when he awoke. One of the dwarves had fallen over him in 
"'Help me, Sam! Help me, Sam! Hold  my hand! I can't  stop it.' Sam took  his "
days of its building. For after three days the Men  of the Mark prepared the 
"Ingamar Eddisford,4041376010831,04-12-1984
"
the whole grey host drew off and vanished like a mist that is driven back by  
"throb would cease suddenly and then be taken up again  at some other  point, "
"in. But there was a rending, tearing noise of work going on inside. Ents and "
"The  dwarves  wanted  to  know  why  he  had  ever  been  brought  at  all,  why  he "
"     'If I had my way, you'd  wish you  were dead now,' said the other. 'I'd "
"     'Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,' said Boromir. "
"rustled in the tunnel. If they dozed, they woke still to darkness and to silence going "
the East. Still the hunters held on.  One day  now had  passed since Boromir  
our great fear. ' 
"was little to the liking of either of  them, not even  after facing so  many "
"Domingo Carslake,4041378574300011,23-12-2000
"
"Reuben Muress,4041376938521272,27-05-1983
"
puffing and sweating. 
"Sheff Nutley,4188314559558409,07-01-1995
"
"breast. And  it was said that ever after, if  any man  looked in that Stone, "
"almost on  a level with his eyes, the walls of the evil city stood ,  and its "
Thrbin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.' 
"branches, swung  from  tree  to  tree, or cast new  ropes across  the dark spaces. They "
"     `Now come, you filth!' he cried. `You've hurt my master, you brute, and "
"Irina O'Quin,4041374244041010,23-05-1988
"
how he could have followed us.' 
"Gib Abramamovh,4761900824411,26-07-1992
"
"Estel McIlroy,4041374142288515,13-12-1982
"
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in 
"worse  in such  a  pass. But mark this!  You  have  been saved, and all your "
""
""
people for many miles round called  it - and many little round doors opened out of 
"If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.' "
trembling. His master was shivering. 
"Emiline Mulleary,4935971185494196,12-10-1987
"
"you were close by,  and we were talking no secrets. But you  can go with him "
"     'One felt  as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with "
"black  against the red light  behind them: it was the grim Morgai, the inner  "
"     `You won't  go again,  you say? Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot! If "
"out of Lugb®rz the first time, years  ago,  and  we had word from High Up to "
feel the weight less when he's walked off some of his own.' 
 
"with them; but he laughed and refused, saying: "
"""This is a heavy load!"" some grumbled. ""They float too deep-some of these are "
"""And  so  do  1.  There  were  Bifur  and  Bofur  as  well.  I  haven't  ventured  to "
"echoes, from far down in the depths, of a bellowing and a trampling that made the "
pass through. 
"In the midst of  this they lit a fire,  for there was  no hope that darkness "
water on his feet. 
strange  twisted  knot of hills. But  always  they  found its  outward faces 
"slope. We should  have no shelter there  from snow, or stones  -- or anything  "
down his belly glittered white with  sparkling  fires of gems  in  the moon-but not in 
"now  had  very little left, perhaps half  his bottle, and  maybe there  were "
pot of beer.' 
####-with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows. 
####-     'Mithrandir!  Mithrandir!' men  cried. 'Now we know that  the  storm is 
"shouted  an  elderly  hobbit  from  the back  of the pavilion.  His name, of "
"about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as close as th is? The  "
involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen before 
"thought sprang back suddenly to  the Elves in the Shire,  and the song  that "
"end  of  the  culvert,  until  only  a  narrow  outlet  remained.  Then  the "
and  may the stars shine upon the end  of your road! Seldom have we had such 
foot.  Strange and wonderful I thought it that  the designs of Mordor should 
"Tony Pryce,4041373715580,03-05-1998
"
treacherous. Frodo shuddered  with disgust at  the touch of the dark unclean 
"the marks  of a  conspiracy. Now,  maybe  he that bore  these  things was  a  "
"     'That is a very interesting remark,' sneered a  voice,  softer than the "
"surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get  such  an answer, not even "
     One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them. 
lengthened my tale over long. The  rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found 
"burning like fire, and his head felt light.  In spite of the shining sun the "
"with  a  silver flagon  and cups,  and  white cakes. Pippin sat down, but he "
"king's  great  doors.  There was  a  dim  sheet  of water  no  longer  overshadowed,  and "
"a bit blind,  and it  must have been  near dark when this fellow come up the "
"any  notice  of  them at all (which was seldom, for they did not eat such creatures ), "
"stalk -like neck was her huge swollen body,  a vast bloated bag, swaying  and "
anything that would explain it?' 
"greater  houses,  and  by  long  wooden  quays  with  many  steps  and  ladders  going "
towards the strangers. 
     `Hai!  hai! yoi!'  A yell  broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The 
"     The hobbits were delighted  to  hear this, and thanked  Tom many times;  "
"be-yes, and even aid you.' "
and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his  dream: 
"victorious  and Barahir  was slain,  and Beren escaping through great  peril "
hand. 
he  suspected  the  Sackville-Bagginses.  On  their  side  they  never  admitted  that  the 
old.  And who then shall govern Gondor and those who look to this City as to 
""
too late. But the quest  of  your companions is over. Your  next  journey is 
outside went on with shifting  hopes and strange  tidings; and still Gandalf 
"of Durin, and Mr. Baggins who has travelled with us out of the West."" "
"death. And  now there came  a  flow of air  to meet them, cold and thin. The "
     'Yes we shall!' cried Pippin. 
more beautiful than any grove or glade that  ever   grew: my  heart  is still 
could  hardly walk. Away  to the  left  something glittered  in the gloom as 
"""Shake him! Wake him!"" shouted the others impatiently. Gallon was not at all "
"Spence Gaish,4041599133196,22-11-1994
"
"him, calling him 'Master Hamfast', and consulting  him  constantly upon  the "
was in both their faces.  
"Alecia Tomovic,4041590413694574,21-12-1976
"
"again, while  we talked, and  they have  lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our "
 
"Jaquenette Blankman,4017959815308820,10-06-1997
"
"parts, where there be mountains of gold, they  say;  but there wasn't enough "
knocked  their  king  Gol-firnbul's  head  clean  off  with  a  wooden  club.  It  sailed  a 
####-utter and impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages  of  Moria had 
     'Good!' said  Legolas.  'But my count  is  now  two  dozen. It has been 
tough 
"green riding-track, and beyond that a wall . On the ride horsemen galloped to  "
"caught  by wolves!""  he  said,  and  it  became  a  proverb,  though we  now  say  'out  of "
"     And  the  King said  to  Beregond: 'Beregond, by  your sword blood  was "
"that  place  I  don't  think  you  will  shoot  anything,  wholesome  or  unwholesome, "
"Yoshi Huffadine,4041593134787065,06-06-1989
"
"very edge of the last  fence of Mordor. Below them, at the  bottom of a fall "
"head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.  "
"does. We shan't ever be safe again, never, gollum! One of  the goblinses will put  it "
he left the Company  and  wandered on  to the ridge; there he stood  in  the 
"front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light "
"was  over  they  began  to  tell  tales  of  their  own,  but  Beorn  seemed  to  be  growing "
food; and Legolas  told them  tales of Lothlurien that the Elves of Mirkwood  
"dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again. "
saying farewell  to  the familiar comforts of Bag End. 'I shall have to  go. 
     He came unto the timeless halls 
"Sauron brooded for a  while.  Thence it turned, smiting  the Vale of  Anduin "
threw them into confusion. 
and got up.  Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat.  'I was 
"into thick air, as is more likely in this room.' "
""
the South. The shadows shrank. 
indeed the  only  one  that had ever been  fought  within the borders of the 
"Hetty Abbet,4041593693690,22-11-1994
"
"what was more, he allowed him to take his companion with him. "
"     'I  fear it may be so with  mine,'  said Frodo. 'There is no real going "
"to  know  what  cram  is,  I  can  only  say  that  I  don't  know  the  recipe;  but  it  is "
"going  fairly  but  not  quite  straight  into  the  side  of  the  hill  -  The  Hill,  as  all  the "
"would be no good, if we never got back alive from it,"" said Thorin. "
is   probable  that  Mer iadoc  obtained   assistance  and  information  from 
"     'I  think  it  is  a sad  story,' said the  wizard, 'and it might  have "
""
"Mr. Frodo as he is.' He shook his  head,  and as he worked things out, slowly  "
"     At  last  Sam could bear it  no longer. `What's all this, Gollum? '  he "
passage twisted and turned constantly; but  he thought  he was  catching the  
began to melt on the spot.' 
"should  be grateful for  the part they have played, but I  do not love them. "
"Roana Durn,4876543416019,10-05-1988
"
"fight! Vanity. For a little space you may triumph  on the field, for a  day. "
"""Fools!"" said Bard. ""Why waste words and wrath on those unhappy creatures? "
"apple-wood. When  everything  was set in  order,  a ll the lights in the room "
"City."" "
"     `For  the  rest, they  shall represent the  other  Free Peoples  of the "
"garden swollen to a realm; his own hands to  use, not the hands of others to "
they saw that he nodded  as if he was falling asleep.  The hobbits sat still 
"the mountains and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the "
"Gondor has such men still in these  days of fading, great must have been its "
"on unbroken. At last after days and days of waiting, as it seemed, when they were "
Chapter 4. A Journey in the Dark 
"Jemmie Quaintance,4017955081452722,04-08-1976
"
"     'We should  never  have done it  without Strider,' said Frodo. `But  we "
     'My name!' said the  old  man again. 'Have you not guessed it  already?  
"####-'Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know  who made the path  -"
"     green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady, "
"sake, and for the sake of poor Belladonna, I will give you what you asked for."" "
"Filberto Roistone,4017958886679754,30-01-1998
"
"     `Or Caradhras less cruel,' said Gimli. `There he stands smiling in  the "
"sting,  and  sorrow, fear, and homeless wandering, or  because some  gift of "
of such dead wood and  heath as they  could find. They  passed the hours  of 
"advice is not  bad. Still, I don't suppose I have the strength  or luck left  "
"name;  and maybe  not,  though  it was  fat  enough. You may walk  unseen,  but  you "
"Leeland Bristow,4017957785266044,11-01-1979
"
"from Middle-earth,  glances upon  the white  locks of old Mindolluin.  It is "
all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my 
covered their eyes; for his  coming  was like the incoming of a  white light 
"     `Be swift  then! ' said  Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.  `The "
"little. And in the morning the banner of  Dol Amroth, a  white ship  like  a  "
""
"     He went on again, but his uneasiness grew, and  every  now and again he "
"present, whatever it may do to me.' "
them.  Coming  to the opening they found  that they had  made their way down 
     'Where  in Middle-earth are we?' said Gimli; and Elladan answered:  'We 
"do?  If  he  cut  the  string  which  hung  him  up,  the  wretched  dwarf  would  tumble "
"they  came  through  yet more  doors  at  the  further  end,  a  sound  of  water  fell  upon "
"were  dead,  or  worse.  Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards "
anxious to  find some  sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us 
to Gandalf and to Thorin. 
####-not speak of your further road for a while.' 
"     'There is  some  good  stone-work here,'  he said as he  looked  a t the "
"'Receive my service, if you will!' "
     `Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. 'I wonder where he is. I hope  those wolves 
"unless he had a great strength of will to  turn it to other purpose, he  saw "
"through key-holes yet!"" "
"Inger Ockendon,4970595302611154,24-03-1997
"
"and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the "
nigh  Bill Ferny's  house I thought  I could see  something in  the  Road. I  
top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm and saw the dim 
"Wilow Pirrone,4017958343370476,16-05-1975
"
"and  here the  Dark  Power, moving its armies like pieces on the  board, was "
"""I did not 'get hold of it,' I was given it,"" said the wizard. "
"     Then  he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin's  back, and rode "
he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall be pursued 
Of the Finding of the Ring  
"glance, but  without any expression in his face either of anger, or pity, or "
"Logan Darko,4619725796430,22-11-1985
"
"     'I did not know  you rode bare-back, Gandalf,' he said. 'You  haven't a  "
"correctly, rising  in surprise and scattering  his cushions. 'Am I right  in "
"     'I will not,' said Aragorn. "
"though only for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed "
"     `You may  well put  your  thinking cap on,  if you've  got one. It's no "
"####-Tom's words may have  missed one meal or many,  but when the food was "
"a gentle  rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all  things fresh "
"bright in  my garden"". Still it smells sweet  when bruised,  does it not? If "
"treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain,  beneath  Erebor "
hewed Forlong  as he fought  alone and unhorsed; and both Duilin of Morthond 
"     It  was  hot  when  I first took it, hot as  a glede,  and my  hand was "
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in  the 
"can roll along at a tremendous pace, I can tell you, when they have to-they took it "
"tale  of  Frodo was most strange  to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo "
"only come up to that orc-tower, but the only  road to take is that road that "
     'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west -bank!' said Frodo.  
on  Helm's  Dike  and  looked into the Coomb. The Death Down  already  stood 
into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace. 
"his  Tower,  if  you can believe it. At least that is  the tale in the City. "
"     'Alas, not me, lord!' she said. 'Shadow  lies on me still.  Look not to "
boughs above. 
"shapes  seemed at once clear cut, as  if they had  been first conceived  and "
"Layne Irnys,4041375452840688,15-02-1976
"
Legolas.  'C ome! Let us  go on! The thought of those merry young folk  driven 
Gimli. 'On the edge of the Forest.' 
was 
"blistered.  One of them,  Beechbone  I  think he was  called,  a  very  tall "
"began  to  get  dark.  Wind  got  up,  and  the  willows  along  the  river-bank  bent  and "
things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as 
     'I bring word to you from my father: The days are short. If thou art in  
in  long  hillsides. Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest. In 
"hasty.  And I  am doing the  asking. You are  in my country. What are you,  I  "
"mountains' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort "
"wonder that trouble came of  it,  I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is "
"     'It  will  go ill  with Wormtongue,  if  Gandalf  comes  upon  him said "
"hours before dawn."" "
and a green light alternated in his eyes as he spoke. 
"Meier Oughtright,4041378043939,11-12-1990
"
"the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia  "
"than a grey  dusk, was now enough for them to see that they were deep in the "
"argued the miller, voicing common  opinion. 'He's often  away from home. And "
"Cynthia Semens,4041598446542439,27-02-1976
"
     to ward all wounds and harm from him; 
"####-cold  and bright. 'This is Sting,' he said, and thrust it with little effort "
"""Get  in now,"" said Fili, ""and one of you haul on  the rope  that  is stuck  in a  tree on "
the attempt. 
"mind dangerous for mortals. But  the Great Rings,  the Rings of Power,  they "
"best  detachable  party  hoods-and his own hat hanging on  the pegs. ""Quite a merry "
"Otha Shimoni,4041376748380,26-09-1997
"
"And  so  Bilbo  was  swung  down  from  the  wall,  and  departed  with  nothing  for "
"Mommy Smitherman,4017951514512,28-02-1982
"
"came the great eagle, Gwaihir  the Windlord, and stood before him. "
"spirals. They did this for a long while, and at last the hobbit opened his eyes again. "
laughing  long  and  softly. Aragorn  felt a shudder run  through him at the 
"Pavia Earp,4017956897904,13-03-2000
"
     'Then what shall we do now?' said Gimli. 'We cannot pursue them through 
     He was taking a far greater risk  than he knew; but  Frodo was too much 
     All now took leave of the Lor d of the City and went to rest  while they 
"they lay,  so  near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence that could "
slopes beyond; but all the while a very uncomfortable thought was growing inside 
     Frodo sighed and sat up. `Where are we? How did I get here?' he asked. 
"Up jumped Bilbo. ""Breakfast!"" he cried. ""Where is breakfast?"" "
The whole mind and purpose of the Power that wielded them was now bent  
jumped up and went out. 
"grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge "
and  the  raft-elves  would  soon  be  steering  it  off  down  the  stream  to  Lake-town. 
"     where keen the air, where pale as glass "
####-most part they were hidden by the reeks and fumes drifting from the fens and 
"     `Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in  the road. A spy, a spy! ' "
there  their  horsemen were gathered about the standard of  their chieftain. 
walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was rising red out 
"you run too  slow, and then you  send for the poor trackers. I've had enough "
####-it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words. Beware!' 
"Ignatius Shadfourth,4041375094912945,12-03-1999
"
drew their hoods down almost  to their mouths; then  quickly  they took each 
"great once, of  a  noble kind that we  should  not  dare to raise  our hands "
Then  he saw that there were  clusters of tents and booths on either side of 
"would give a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes."" "
"Boromir was then in peril and was slain, I  must fear that all my companions "
"     'But if you would take my  counsel,'  said  Jomer  in a low voice, 'you  "
"     On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains  and champions fell  "
"don't know: Mauh®r and his lads are  in the forest, and they  should turn up "
a distance they could see  in the dim light the movement of the black guards 
"and plied  their whips, scuffles broke out and  some blades  were  drawn.  A "
"away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his feet on "
they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great River. North-
"Ignatius Birchenhead,4041597830421531,02-10-1997
"
another with their broad-bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged  guard. His 
"""Gandalf for certain this time,"" he thought as he puffed along the passage. But "
Master  says he must get in. So we must try some way. There is no  other way 
     Gilthoniel! O Elbereth! 
"Stanwood Baxstar,4132505527960083,11-11-1989
"
"""What is it?"" said the others coming up. "
""
lips  when he saw that  all the others regarded  the  old  hobbit with grave 
dull grey hours passed without event. As the third  day of their voyage wore 
"     Gandalf moved  his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo. "
"Rancell Fallowes,4802873959675,08-11-1978
"
     They had  gone  only a mile  or so from the cliff when the  land sloped 
friends. Now there is need of haste.' 
     The Road lay quiet under the long  shadows of early  evening. There was 
"careful in choosing! And be  careful of what  you say,  even to your closest  "
brightly. But the light brought little hope to  the Riders  of the Mark. The 
"Ellary Croysdale,4017957376937326,02-04-2001
"
     Frodo  felt his  chin go down and  his head nod. Just in front  of  him 
lanterns passing  through the trees. Men nearby began to move uncertainly in 
     As on a hill-top high and far 
"own  home. Well, dearest friend,  the tree grows  best  in the  land of  its "
"longer, and  his face more lined with care and  wisdom; but his eyes were as "
about a tree near the bank. 
stand?' 
     To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn. 
"the floor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, running on a stiff "
"without him, and our hope dwindles.' "
like  a  green cloud upon their left; and as the night deepened  more lights 
"""O!  out  and  about  somewhere,""  they  told  him.  But  he  saw  no  sign  of  the "
"     For a while Frodo  stood  there on  the  high stone, and  a shiver  ran "
ridiculous song tha t Bilbo had been rather  fond of (and indeed rather proud 
"     'Well, lord,' said Gimli, 'and what say you now?' "
"in  the  West  since  the days of  dawn, and  I have dwelt  with  him  years "
"     'Oh  yes, he is!'  said Merry,  waking  up  a little, and  beginning to "
or other was being broken;  but there was no gainsaying four such  masterful 
"long  road  wound  away,  and  the  beacon  hills  marched  past:  Calenhad, "
     A cold voice answered: 'Come not between the Nazgyl and his prey! Or he 
uncounted;  for  ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin  I  passed over the 
"mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?' "
"Shire-holidays,  which occurred at  frequent intervals. But  the  offices of "
####-     'Is  it not guarded? ' asked Frodo sternly. `And did you escape out  of 
at least once a week. But they never got tired of them. 
""
speaking  the  darkness  grew.  The  dwarves  halted  and  gazed  at  the  sky.  The  elves 
and also because it was one of the things forbidden by the Chief. It  burned 
home. 
strayings of  beasts than of people. There were in all the Shire only twelve 
"Stan Brain,4979040616703802,17-02-1992
"
     umaryo airetbri-lnrinen. 
"Ring be  your  weapon, if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth  "
"has to decide, and all  that  it has to decide. Elves  may  thrive on speech "
     Pippin lifted it  and presented the hilt  to him.   'Whence  came this?' 
"small, and  rather out of place; but that  feeling quickly passed. The feast  "
     `Then you knew of the Riders already -before I met them?' 
"get into, thanks  to the Great ones who  are here.' He bowed to the Lord and "
"that time this seemed pleasant. There they took food and drink,  and made as "
"cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Udyn. Go back to  the "
turned  to  stone  as  he  stooped;  and  Bert  and  Tom  were  stuck  like  rocks  as  they 
"away on the wind. So terrible was the cry that for a moment all stood still, "
"our hope. For imagining war he has let loose war,  believing  that he has no "
"Kendell McNally,4041373516186,11-05-1994
"
"Justen Andrat,4041376300653,09-02-1995
"
"     'He's not too  well,  and not too bad, Sam,' said the farmer. 'They dug "
"Pippa Gehringer,4041373686609,02-03-1993
"
lose heart. They still remembered  the hopeful view they had had of the line  
"came up to him, leading his horse. "
"Etheline Rafferty,4017951987416770,23-10-1982
"
ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even  in Gondor they were a  
in  time to a  crossing in a circle of  dark trees. On the right a road went 
"Maggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?' "
"Frodo, and he says it's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The last lap.' "
"cliffs, and gaping gates of steel and adamant: and then  all passed.  Towers "
dad? 
"Demetrius Renfield,4017951515030796,28-12-1994
"
easier  tonight and with a lighter heart. You've given  me a powerful lot to 
inspiration and  was begun  in order to provide  the necessary background of 
"eagle came back, seized him in his talons by the back of his coat, and swooped off. "
"He  dived  under  the  blankets  and  hid  his  head,  and  fell  asleep  again  at  last  in "
"####-happened that I have at last  understood, even as we ride together. But if I  "
Even  from where they stood they felt the malice  of the Watchers beating on 
"not to be killed, unless the filthy Whiteskins break through. Understand? As "
each evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was waning fast; slowly the 
"Lothario Brooker,4848649244595,07-04-1998
"
earned).  He  was  soon  fast  asleep  forgetting  all  his  worries  till  the  morning.  As 
"Pepita Gorioli,4041597971548,07-07-1976
"
I have not done ill?' He looked at his father. 
"     'Over the bridge!' cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. `Fly! This is "
ago; but I have managed it at last.' 
some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it. 
"them, after all. For somehow, he could not go  to sleep for a  long while; and when "
"in its place once more, still crowned with white and golden flowers: and men "
     All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They felt that 
     But stream and pool 
"block was shaped like a heavy door, and  was less than twice his own height. "
 
Anurien 
the king should receive the  crown from his father ere  he died; or if  that 
more need of thought than of sleep.' 
"silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly, as if struggling with  tears. "
to answer; and the power of  Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in 
heard as a loud hiss in the silence. 
""
If  he  lifted  his  head  he  could  see  a  glimpse  of  the  distant  forest.  As  the  sun 
entered it. But it is the realm of Thjoden  the King. None ride here save by 
     The round Moon rolled behind the hill 
"     The last stage of their journey to  Orodruin came, and it was a torment "
the wild.  The  men of  the White Mountains use them; though these have been 
Denethor or the Grey Wanderer?' 
"them; and taking them by the hand,  Frodo upon  his  right and Sam upon  his "
""
"grass was scorched  and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but "
"again  at the distant pinnacles now dwindling into  night, and the  sound of "
between 
and down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the dead hand held 
shapes spring over  the  ring of stones. More and more followed. Through the 
"     Sam felt  a bit remorseful, though not more trustful. 'Sorry.' he said. "
"Back to pasture, back to mead, "
known round here as Strider. Goes  about at a great pace on his long shanks;  
"and join me, Sam?' "
out. 
"Si Bulteel,4041372065675965,20-02-1988
"
"eating.  Fortunately  he  had  once  heard  something  rather  like  this  before,  and "
""
"Berkley Lukehurst,4041372531053,02-06-1982
"
"     Until at last our toil be passed, "
"####-beyond anything that Gollum had expected from this slow stupid hobbit, as he "
"Sanders Boyde,4754895174428493,31-01-1977
"
But  even the deafest  and most stay-at-home began to hear queer  tales; and 
wait. 
voice: 
"####-     Next to Frodo  on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly "
"still  kept  in their  hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon the meadows by "
"     'I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,' said Frodo. "
and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs.  
"     Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to "
"longer, pale in the twilight as if his  fire was spent  or veiled; the other  "
"very awkward, and  wondering  if they would be of  any use. Fighting had not "
"has  been called for long years;  but its right  name, Barliman, is  Fornost  "
"Beatrix Becraft,4041370152993,03-11-1996
"
"all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm, now louder on one "
"     The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could  see  them now,  "
"Maisey Vedishchev,4881704820074154,22-05-1984
"
"right, almost due south, and they must turn towards it. Yet  still before it "
"wherefore your  coming is to us as  the footstep  of  Doom? For if you fail, "
understand.' 
####-clambered  out  of  sight. Sam heard  a bolt drawn back.  Then he  heard the 
places of  the world.'  He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever  it 
"coming home, and finding things all right, though not quite the same  -- like "
"the Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a man of arms of the  Guard of "
Smaug. 
"     The  dale  ran like  a stony  trough between  the  ridged  hills, and a  "
but you may rest upon the way.' 
"woods were like the woods of Lothlurien. only thicker stronger, younger. And "
""
"Gollum's outstretched arm, just below the elbow.  "
strength of Grishnbkh's hairy arms.  
"####-the greenwood far from  our halls. If ever  you are our guests at  home,  we "
     'Hullo!' said Bilbo. 'I wondered if you would turn up.' 
me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go 
round the  City for  a while  and cheer my loneliness. I can  tell  you some 
"you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laugh "
""
whatever may come after.' 
before  long.  So  cheer  up  Bilbo  and  don't  look  so  glum.  Cheer  up  Thorin  and 
""
summertime though it was. The fire burned low and he fell asleep. Yet in the night 
"steeper. They were climbing steadily. At their first  halt they looked back, "
looking at. 
"Maegan Larsen,4865954336949,01-08-1993
"
"     All that  host  was clad in  sable, dark  as the night. Against the wan "
"     `Silly!' he said  to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered why he "
"swords, not with  the curved scimitars usual with Orcs: and they had bows  of "
The Elvenking had received news from his own messengers and from the birds 
"got so  far,  not even within  sight of the pass, without  him, and so we'll "
"     'Yes, we do,' said Pippin sadly. 'The story seems to be going on, but I "
"governed the city since that day, though it was many generations of Men ago. "
"gleam in  Boromir's eyes, yet his face was still kind  and friendly.  'It is "
"instead of the empty ones, if there is anything in weight."" "
uneasily.  Poor  Bill the  pony  trembled  and sweated where he  stood.  The  
your 
"     `A job of work for me, I can see; but I'm so tired,' he kept on saying. "
""
""
"did not understand,  Pippin  walked  softly to  where Gandalf lay. He looked "
"For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass "
we  refused him.  for he puts  beasts  to evil use. Then he sent  plundering 
"     A man came and beckoned to the  hobbits, and took them to the recess at "
"loved  to  call  him.  But if Legolas was with  the  Company,  he would  not "
and investigate!' 
"should dwell there hungry but unabated in  malice,  a more  sure  watch upon "
prove useful. You will  have to leave the  open  road after tonight; for the 
"He would not rest on the ground so near the evil road, and after some debate "
"orcs lurked, ready at a signal to issue forth like black ants going to  war. "
"it was opened, and he could  not wait: time  was  desperately precious. He no "
####-sobered  even Thorin  again. The  bridge  that Balin  had  spoken  of  they  found  long 
afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.' 
"     'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our "
gathering in haste great forces to meet the onslaught of the Captains of the 
"Erie Tumayan,4017953069630,28-12-1998
"
####-unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go 
"branch  when  the  spiders  began  to  come  back,  more  full  of  rage  than  ever.  Bilbo "
among  so many  marvels. The  world is  all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf  in 
     beyond the days of mortal lands. 
strengthen us.' But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road. 
was strewn with bodies. Right at his feet were  two  orc-archers with knives 
"help  the hobbit,  although he was  feeling very  sick  and  ill  from  spider-poison, and "
"####-eastern edge of  the mountains. ""I hear wolves' voices! Are  the goblins at mischief "
####-way. 
loneliness and vastness of  the dolven halls and endlessly branching  stairs 
"of it entered into her wounded head  and scored it with unbearable pain, and "
"we can manage, seemingly.' "
"     Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire, "
"companies well nigh five and fifty  hundreds of Riders fully armed, and many "
"hearing far off_ great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away, "
round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting this way and 
     The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds  rolled 
"gullies  of the  rocky wall, but the sounds were those of shrill  cries, and "
####-two Orcs up: their  voices were growing  nearer again. Now they seemed quite 
     lords took and lowly. Long now they sleep 
hedge: the  last  house  in the village.  In one of the  windows he caught a  
Hunters  became the hunted. The retreat  became  an onslaught. The field was 
"     In the morning  they  found, for the first time since they had left the "
"Actually, as I have told you, they were not far off the edge of the forest; and if "
And elves are yet singing 
this morning. We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast when Treebeard 
"of Mordor, such wonder and terror came on him that he stood still forgetting "
 
obedient line six  ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainly 
you. you will not easily come out again.  Not  unless the  dark hands of the 
"account of the War.  But annexed to  it  and preserved with it, probably m a  "
"towards them like a gathering wind. Then there was a loud trumpet-blast, and "
"Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the "
"These, however, did  not go far before they were crossed by orc-prints, also "
"eagle-lord  appeared  to  know  one  another  slightly,  and  even  to  be  on  friendly "
"     They set out  at once: Mablung and  Damrod  a little ahead, and Faramir "
"""This was made  by  Thror,  your  grandfather,  Thorin,  he  said  in  answer  to  the "
foolish. 
you  know what I mean. Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame 
"Andrei Von Welldun,4041596139623797,19-12-1996
"
"Giorgio Mitchelmore,4041598465355952,08-04-1988
"
"at last they  halted  and  dismounted,  even  Aragorn  was stiff and  weary. "
"####-hunting, she just gives 'em a dab in the neck and  they go as limp as  boned "
"were  at  last  approaching  the gap in  the hills,  the north-gate  of  the "
"in  a  last  desperate  stand,  he  preferred  on  the  whole  to  defend  the  Elvenking. "
"have a peep, Lady, if you're willing.' "
"Shellysheldon Kordovani,4041599097615,18-07-1997
"
     Frodo  was left  to himself  for a while. for Sam had fallen asleep. He 
"     There was a crash  on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams  and "
answers came louder and nearer. In this way they came at last to what looked 
"Where is Treebeard, Merry?' "
"burdens,  and  nearly  all  of  Dain's  folks,  in  spite  of  their  rapid  march,  bore  huge "
it! The Moon's gone. and the night's going. We'd better start.' 
     O! Water is fair that leaps on high 
"Ali Banbridge,4041375510272908,22-07-1992
"
"a new strength and resolve, he leaped. "
they had not heard before. It chilled them with fear. 
though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but 
some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!' 
"branches  sticking  out  at  intervals  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel.  Bifur,  Bofur, "
"####-immensely fond  of  you all, and that eleventy -one years is too short a time "
"""Time's up!"" he said. "
"to  pass.  Come  with me, Pippin! But you,  Beregond,  should  return to the "
wrote constantly to all their friends (and a  selection  of their relations)  
"each good day as it came, taking plea sure in every  meal,  and in every word "
wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.  
"rearguard. Once again they turned at bay, facing the oncoming lines of fire. "
"imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I "
"yesterday, the  sixth  since  we rode  from Dunharrow. But still Aragorn was "
"turned to Gandalf, asking questions about  the Rohirrim and  their policies,  "
"Keelia Brock,4017959392200,15-06-1987
"
     'There  was no  need.  He  halted  just by  us and looked down  at  us. 
"orc-arrows, so as  to prevent any sortie, while a company  rode off to  deal "
"guessed  from  Thorin's  description;  but  indeed  there  could  not  be  two  such  gems, "
"and whole, for many years. You have so much to enjoy and to be, and to do.' "
"her  again  standing  like a  queen,  great and  beautiful,  but  no  longer  "
by Widow Rumble.' 
"faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and  lo! she was  shrunken: a slender  "
they have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to know. Joy 
"Benedikt Norgan,4876160375977,09-08-1983
"
"     `Of course. This is merrymaking not business.  Come and go as you like,  "
hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.' 
forgotten.' 
     but never did fountain sound so sweet 
"Kristina MacManus,4692626901152675,18-10-1980
"
""
'I must go now or I shall never go.  I shan't  get  a  chance  again. I hate 
"are not  good, but only  here have I learned  how evil they may seem to this "
"mad. I always said so,'  was probably  the  most  popular comment.  Even the "
     Every now and again there  came  into his mind unbidden a vision of the  
"trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row.  I ought to "
"him in  silence, except Merry who turned away. But  Gandalf's face was still  "
I shall take. Tomorrow I shall ride by the Paths of the Dead.' 
"catch  me.  I  have  said good-bye, and I couldn't bear  to  do it  all over  "
the drums?  ' 
"door; and they grew terrified, too, of the echoing noise. "
"Beverley Kilban,4041599119712523,20-01-1988
"
"well. Old Gaffer  Gamgee got  two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a  woollen "
     Presently he came to an open  space  where a small tent had been set up 
will draw off much of the help  that  we looked  to  have  from Lebennin and  
     No man spoke. 
wine and a pie that did not belong to him. The rest of the night he had to pass wet 
"usually he hid it in a hole in the rock on his island, and was always going back to "
black. 
"Lindsey Rishworth,4041595942988,02-02-1986
"
Bilbo seeing what had happened and having nothing better  to ask stuck  to his 
yet at any rate. 
"the memory of the kings, Jowyn  Lady of Rohan came  forth, golden as the sun "
"Maximilian Russon,4237050796766,09-08-1999
"
three hobbit-bows twanged and Wormtongue fell dead. 
indeed:  such light and flame  cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the 
nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.' 
done?' 
were with him: not until it was too  late.  All  that I have done  today has 
a  sweet  scent just  before they touched  their  upturned faces. There were 
"     'You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,' said "
      
no hope in your journey.  But  will  you scorn our help?  For we offer it to 
a springing wood. Loudly and  joyously  they shouted as  Thjoden came forth. 
old gaffer used to say. And I don't reckon that these folk  can do much more 
"pieces. Right in the middle  of the road  the long forefinger lay,  white in "
"vassals  from the northern mountains, speeding on a gathering wind. Straight "
Sam by the  arm. `What's  that?  '  he whispered. `Look  over  there on  the 
who bears the burden.' 
He rose in fire and went away south towards the Running River.  
"a queer  place, and  not for just any one to venture in. I am surprised that "
any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; nor was  there 
"new array,  but he knew  now  that he was taking part in no  play; he was in "
"one.  ""And  Fili!""  added  the  other;  and  they  both  swept  off  their  blue  hoods  and "
the general bustle. 
     And  so  the  companies  came and  were hailed and  cheered  and passed 
"could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.  "
"ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the "
"I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such plain orders to Orcs,  "
was painted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN  
"him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom,  and a green ooze trickling from "
and at  their coming all other quarrels were  forgotten. Their only hope was  to  lure 
"Then  baa-baa-baa!  was  heard,  and  in  came  some  snow-white  sheep  led  by  a "
"forward  and  away,  and stood up, and then  quickly he wheeled away  to his "
"Aurelia Montez,4950647559277090,17-03-1988
"
"     `I suppose it's no good asking ""what way do we go now?"" We  can't go no "
"our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we should take from "
"Urson Scimonelli,4535641540484018,24-11-1993
"
""
"     they bites our hands, "
crying with harsh voices like beasts and  carrion-birds. But soon there were 
precipice. There  for some time  they sat huddled mournfully together in the 
as if it was a chasm in the mountains.  
has taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with the 
"Vidovik Kellie,4041374262392,10-07-1983
"
"Nert Biggs,4041596404800930,22-09-1991
"
""
"to move when I was left alone, or  one of the guards came. Until the yelling "
"! !"" "
"listeners  in the air. `Not here, no. Not rest here. Fools! Eyes can see us. "
they  are. somehow. And the Moon's growing. We haven't  seen him for a night 
"this country that  could see us,  as we stand here, from that hill-top.  Not "
     O Light to us that wander here 
"     A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry. "
""
"     'I have come,' he said. 'But I  do not choose now to do what I  came to "
     But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.'  
"####-     'You are  held wise, my friend Wormtongue,  and are  doubtless a  great "
"Dixie Charlo,4041370690014766,23-01-1982
"
"horses, "
"seals  your lips who saw him  last, and holds from me that  which I  long to "
the ridge and saw the wintry sun going downwards to the West. 
"words,  until they stood again upon the grass  beyond the eaves of  Fangorn.  "
"were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest, the eye dwindled  "
""
twice  that  south.  But  you  wouldn't  get  a  safe  path  even  then.  There  are  no  safe 
"that? I thought I saw a twinkle of light in the forest."" "
""
high up  in the turret far above; but he  might search for  a day  before he 
"fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen. "
"altogether without  food)  since  the dragon  smashed  the magic door, but Bilbo had "
"blew  three loud  hoots. The noise subsided. /  shall not keep you  long, he "
"     'At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,' he said; 'but now I "
####-     The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards them. The orcs yelled 
"""Let us return!"" he said. ""We can do no good here!– And I don't like these dark "
 
"####-if you insist on going too, well that is your affair.' "
"away long ago. They took his Precious, and he's lost now.' "
Bilbo  heard  this-the  dwarves  were  on  the  rocks  just  :  above  the  enclosure 
"much, not least because there would now be no  need to decide his course for "
""
"Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the  things that  we have so far striven in vain "
Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn Muil. The 
"Soon  the  attackers  were  attacked,  and  they  were  forced  into  a  great  ring,  facing "
"####-     'It will be Bilbo's Birthday on Thursday, Sam,'  he  said. 'And he will "
"victory, amid  the plunder of armies, and  you wonder how we  came by  a few "
said. 'And lighting   a fire  was dangerous  in these  parts.  But I do  feel 
"     'It is just as I feared,' he said, when he came back.  'Sam  and Pippin "
"here, and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world. "
"Ferrell Ambrosi,4041376341335,05-08-2000
"
should we seek a broken sword?' 
"     'And now  that the  great ones have gone to discuss high matters,' said "
"     `Yes,  long  and weary,' said Gandalf, `but not without profit. For one "
     Then one of the knights took the king's banner from the hand of Guthlbf 
"     'Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!' he boomed, when he saw "
"own  pace,  having no desire to hasten  towards  the perils that lay beyond, "
"pushed off. Some of them were wine-barrels, and these were not much use, as they "
danger was upon them. A whirring noise was heard. A red light touched the points 
"and  also  instruments of  torture,  they make very well, or get other people  to make "
"     Frodo  took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and  glanced  at it, but "
and tower: 'And®ril! And®ril goes to  war. The Blade that  was Broken shines 
impress on you once more: don't use it!'  
"Cloe Sudddard,4041370583999,26-11-1979
"
"Marjie Togwell,4041591347740764,08-11-1981
"
to see you before?' 
 
and jeered at them. 
into a toad.' 
"     'All the same, I'd  rather have  him under  my eye,' said Sam. 'All the "
"     When this  slender bridge had been made, the Company passed  over, some "
     Slowly in Pippin's aching head memory pieced itself together and became 
"there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart. "
"Aida Vedyashkin,4017950738351,08-12-1992
"
"Andree O' Dooley,4041374497063,15-07-1999
"
     Chapter 4   The Field of Cormallen   
"full  of  colour, and  seemed  peaceful  and wholesome. Strider   guided them "
"while,  they  fell  to  arguing.  Some  said  ""no""  and  some  said  ""yes.""  Some  said  they "
"heart.' He yawned. `I could sleep for a week, and I'd be better  for it. And "
they saw that  he  carried a great cudgel. He looked at them  with  fear and 
"through a threatening haze it  gleamed, remote, a  sullen red, as if it were "
"scuffling  at  the  door. Bilbo .wondered what it was, and whether it could be Beorn "
slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profou nd 
"the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the "
####-<h4>Chapter 2.</h4> <br> The Shadow of the Past 
"     When they  had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They  put out the  "
about in a fog!' 
"Melonie Schultze,4041594192007,07-06-1999
"
"are strange folk. I do not like this  place, and I shall like it no more  by "
"I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long "
laughed.' 
"of  Khand. Southrons  in  scarlet, and  out  of  Far  Harad  black  men  like "
     Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing? 
####-him was clinging to some old barrel or  piece of  wood. But  Treebeard waded 
"mark, for twenty guests were invited  and  there were several meals at which  "
"Mr. Frodo, but you've gone and made me that hungry and thirsty! I don't know "
armour ever been before against Smaug the Dreadful? This treasure is not yet won 
"     'I  didn't ought  to have left  my blanket  behind,' muttered Sam;  and "
be seen on this  side and  that; but it was empty save for two or three more 
cliff!' 
"Adrian Churchyard,4409596973579499,19-05-1989
"
     Meanwhile an argument was going on by the  fireplace. Mr. Butterbur had 
"says I must go  or I will go, then he  must try some way. But he must not go "
"     'But  this  is  madness,' she  said.  'For  here are  men of renown and "
"     'It's Sam, Sam Gamgee. I've come back.' "
"much with the remnants  of  the  Easterlings  and Southrons, until  all were "
"word. We  are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what "
"where  they stood. When he saw  Strider, he dismounted and  ran to meet  him "
 
learned  the names and purpose of all thy companions. So! With the left hand 
or in the Deep. 
three won't want mushrooms again?' said Fredegar without much hope. 
""
"came a rumble, rising to a deafening  crash  and roar;  the earth shook, the "
"any more today, if day it is?' "
"     'So it is said in the lore of my land,' said the Prince; 'yet never has "
wielded. A mighty ea gle  swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed 
"not appear again, and the horses did not return. "
and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired. 
""
interested in  roots and beginnings; he dived into  deep pools; he  burrowed 
"nets of  gossamer twinkled  on  every bush.  Sam  walked beside  him, saying "
""
more than one. And I know where he's going to.' 
and  drew up outside the  inn. The houses looked large  and strange to them.  
"     never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead. "
climbing!' 
"Matty Scurrey,4017959393323,31-10-1988
"
     Now quicker the fiddle went deedle -dum-diddle; 
looked terrified. 
"####-afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time,  as  we walked in gladness "
"Aragorn succoured  me and my people, so I will aid him when he calls. I will "
"     And so  it was that Gwaihir  saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes, as "
"a  dwarf-  lad.  This  very  height  was  once  named  Ravenhill,  because  there  was  a "
garment and  blanket they possessed;  but Strider was  content with a single 
"Over snow by winter sown, "
""
"Wendye Karus,4041374799955,31-03-1978
"
"     'Is that all that you have to say? ' said Aragorn, looking hard and not "
"Frodo and Gollum  would  meet  before the end. For good, or for evil. But of "
""
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped  after  
"if they hadn't kept  on interrupting. I tried to  make  a few notes,  but we "
"the  Wargs.  Gandalf  understood  it.  Bilbo  did  not,  but  it  sounded  terrible  to  him, "
"you shall serve the Lady Jowyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.' "
"     'Sleep  again, and do  not be  afraid!' said Gandalf. 'For you are  not "
"     Thus spoke a  forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall  and "
darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected.  Sam was on 
slopes of the hill. The  Bree-hobbits  claim to have been the  first  actual 
"hill a ring was made facing all ways, bristling with spear and sword. But in "
"very hard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance. "
Come on now! Once more!' 
"could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy walls "
"Chuck Slinn,4041591810262,11-02-1981
"
"     The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west  of the Coomb,  "
"Rahal Dewane,4041378895527797,10-07-1995
"
"they listened, for there was a strong music in it. "
"is  over,  and  then  again of  course we may not. That depends on your  luck  and on "
"feigned, with its varied  applicability  to the  thought  and  experience of "
full by one who knows it best. 
it amused his wickedness  to  start a game which might end  in providing him 
about food and drink?' 
"Melisse Honig,4017956094262,04-03-2000
"
"breathed  on it, and when the water  was still again she spoke. `Here is the "
"and Pippin, 'except  good advice.'  And when he had given them a fair sample "
"     He imagined suddenly that he  caught a muffled cry, and he made towards "
middle. Though  it was summer there was a wood-fire burning and the smoke was 
     The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless; the 
"could hear  the noise of a great hunt going by  to  the north of  the path, though they "
"keep his Ring,  if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it "
"should at some time return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it "
"     The King then chose  men that  were unhurt and had swift horses, and he "
"green fields,  and there  was much coming and going: wains moving  in  lines "
reputation  went  up  a  very  great  deal  with  the  dwarves  after  this.  If  they had  still 
smouldering  in his  brown  eyes  that would  have  made  Ted Sandyman  step 
of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden. 
"The smell of the roast meats was so enchanting that, without waiting to consult "
certain was ever known among us of his end.' 
spiders were beginning to weave their webs all round them again from tree to tree. 
"####-     'Here, what are  you doing? ' cried Sam, his suspicions coming back  as "
swiftly with  the flight of  the four men  towards the  Gate.  It seemed  to 
     Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted look of 
Far over the misty mountains grim 
"crept along to Frodo. Frodo  half opened his eyes as Sam stood over him, and "
"Hope Dybell,4041592834535,22-01-1993
"
make ready to enter the  Mines? For here I fear we  must say farewell to our  
"Lurlene Longford,4017959797598,12-08-1985
"
"obviously magical.  Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before,  and "
"Rudolph Nano,4041379713641984,12-08-1997
"
"the wound. If they had succeeded, you would  have become like they are, only "
"     `There is much  to tell, good and bad,' said  Gluin; 'yet it  is mostly "
"Meridith Mattielli,4215419037110561,24-06-1986
"
"mountains,  a vast soaring  darkness  sprang into the sky,  flickering  with "
"but  they were  fresh  and poignant,  as if  he  had  at  that  moment first  "
the Ford  there is a small hollow  beside  the  road masked by a few stunted 
"and I have both passed under the wings of the Shadow, and the same hand drew "
"weariness!"" "
"especially maidens, to eat, until Dale was ruined, and all the people dead or gone. "
"Darda Prys,4041590975427199,21-08-1980
"
The rest fled. 
Nameless Land.  I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly 
"through  fen and forest, battle  and death, to  rescue you! And here we find "
is a part of my name for it; I do not know what  the word is  in the outside 
     'The king calls for you.' 
"Arlena Pinnock,4244444923692,13-03-1995
"
"behind, cleaving its narrow way between pine-clad  walls; and now  through a  "
"the  goblins'  realm.  When  the  goblins  discovered  that,  they  put  out  their  torches "
admiration  and  respect were given mostly  to Mr. Meriadoc and Mr. Peregrin 
####-answer came. 
"####-guess, then  he would kill him and eat him;  but if Bilbo defeated him, then "
""
oncoming of a wall of night at the last end of the world. 
"and  ages,  not  since  his  friend  the  Old  Took  died,  in  fact,  and  the  hobbits  had "
And then he swayed and leaned upon his father's chair. 
"Lavinia Filtness,4041594298176,09-04-1990
"
"Lillis Panchen,4017950491159,14-02-1980
"
perish yet. Not though  the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build 
"dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins  of old works of stone. "
     'Folk say that Dead Men  out of the Dark Years guard  the way  and will 
"     'There go three that I love, and the  smallest not the least,' he said. "
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of 
     'Greetings!' said  the la d. 'Where do you come from? You are a stranger  
gazed  at them.  They had expected to see a number of creatures as much like 
"of the City  and saw the Prince of Dol Amroth ride in with  his banners, the "
know it.  But things have changed since then.  And  I kept him until  he was 
"Abramo Titchard,4041376556801949,22-10-1985
"
"rightly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company  is now "
"ripples, black -edged  with shadow in  the  waning  light: great  rings  were "
sign might mean. 
through the suns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which 
lying fast asleep under  a great  dark cliff. Or fast asleep he had  thought 
"hours,  three  hours: how many  had  they  passed  in  this  lightless  hole?  "
"the right  the  Prince Imrahil with the men of Dol Amroth tall and fair, and "
hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; fur it is easier 
days.' 
"we   feel   her,  even  when  she   is  hidden.   Already  she  climbs  over  "
"Katrine Blackman,4017954775870,23-05-1998
"
"Evy Baszniak,4041595051300194,01-08-1975
"
"But  there they found Faramir,  still dreaming in  his fever, lying upon the "
"     'Maybe  not,' answered Gandalf. 'Hobbits  are, or were,  no concern  of "
"####-when he returns. After the Ents had gone, we felt tired,  and hungry. But we "
"     `No, no! ' said Gollum. `No use. We can't  go further. Smjagol  said so. "
"by night, we are all too tired-except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.' "
"Tripp Leask,4017953275039,13-02-1993
"
"feeling quite  at home, and were chatting  gaily about events in the  Shire. "
it were turned into your language. I like it. We will stay here tonight.' He 
that you need in order to  understand  the purposes of the  Enemy. There  is 
"eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and he gasped. "
"his  hands  on his hips,  and a look on his  face as  if he was addressing a  "
"at all the faces, but they were not  turned to him. All the Council sat with "
"     'You are a set  of deceitful  scoundrels!'  he  said,  turning  to  the "
Bilbo  plucked  up  courage  and  put  his  little  hand  in William's  enormous  pocket. 
"Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again far  "
from it the two sheathed knives.  
"bushes, sniffing and muttering. Then. suddenly he disappeared. "
"safe, safe from doing any  mor e harm. You should know that above all  I hate "
"marvellous  and  magical  toys,  the  like  of  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  world "
"again, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each time they "
candles on the table. 'Nob!  Take  the  water to the rooms!' He came in  and 
water falling nearby. 
     high lord of the host. Harding and Guthlbf 
"Firstborn decrease, and the two  kindreds are estranged. And ever since that "
the  out-companies. Small bands of weary  and  often wounded  men came first  
"Stanwood Lipson,4492939587460151,23-10-1997
"
"     'I will  not say  farewell, my  lord,' said  Pippin kneeling.  And then "
"from the shadow behind and the deep  gloom  beneath the cliff upon his left, "
"later I will find some other clothes, perhaps.' "
"     'Do  you hear this, Wormtongue?' said Thjoden. 'This is your choice: to "
"Maia Scarlon,4041592527058043,08-10-1978
"
 
"you only  understanding and pity, then you desired to have nothing, unless a  "
"sticky ooze,  so that his  fa ce was brought close to the surface of the dark "
"sleeping. For a while  Sam sat musing, and  tending the fire till  the water  "
"needles, and here and there dead trees, were soon in flames. All round the clearing "
"Celine Worrall,4041371774852,12-12-1992
"
""
scouts or small parties from the main host. At nightfall of the fifth day of 
"Alexei Giacopetti,4434706280903,10-06-1989
"
"off,  and  Wargs  run  swifter  than  ponies.  Still  you  are  safer  going  north,  even "
"roused the Dwarf. 'Come! We must go,' he said. 'The scent is growing cold.' "
"     `Half  an hour, maybe,' he answered.  `Or it  might be an hour. I  have "
of 
"     'Who are they, and what are you talking about?' "
"walking in the forest,  wading in the  water, leaping on the hill-tops under  "
"folk  of  the Marish,  and  of Buckland,  east  of  the  River,  which  they "
"Ansell Paulon,4041379843952871,14-08-1980
"
####-####- 
"Cathleen Goodale,4017952123189206,19-04-1976
"
time is running out. All speed is needed.' 
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. 
"unwashed-up,  pushing  his  keys  into  Gandalf's  hands,  and  running  as  fast  as  his "
"Tildi Loughren,4017956686919,11-07-1993
"
"unpleasantly)  to  a  doze,  and  from  a  doze  to wide waking.  There was  a  breath  of "
"After  a good while  the  eagles must have  seen  the point  they were making  for, "
the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do  not find  
"####-well of water, clear as crystal,  from which a freshet fell over a stone lip "
"other people came (without orders): Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers, and "
"whistle  begin  to  come  after  me —  you  will  see  the  way  I  go-but  only  in  pairs, "
"""We found them sheltering in our Front Porch."" "
"things,  of  their  long road and many  adventures;  they questioned Aragorn "
"did not presume to  use it,  nor to  challenge Sauron, knowing the limits of "
have 
"make  one  weep,  after  all  one  has  gone  through.  I  would  rather  old  Smaug  had "
"Gandalf stirred and spoke to Shadowfax, and was  about to  ride through  the "
Nor will  he  count  the heads  of  the enemy save  with a  sword.  I am not 
In their  dark cloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings. 
"sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough,  and that's what I'm  going  to "
####- 
"For  some  time Bilbo  sat and  thought about  this water-gate, and wondered if it "
length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes  and fingers (anything from 
"Galadhrim, the Tree-people. Deep  in  their forest the trees are very great. "
     In rode the Lord  of the Nazgyl. A great black  shape against the fires 
"Magic who dwells in the Golden  Wood, then they may look for  strange things "
Clap! Snap! the black crack! 
red. 
"somewhere round this way."" And with that he went off along the hedge taking the "
"brought  it down with  us, then you  can  pass on to me ninnyhammer, or  any "
else. Frodo began to listen. 
"     'Herdsmen!'  said  Thjoden. 'Where  are their  flocks? What  are  they, "
"far away, a light growing in the southern sky. But it brought little hope to "
"whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or walking to "
"     Merry  hurried off to  give orders. Farmer Cotton cleared  the  street, "
"     'Now it is time  to drink the cup of  farewell,' she said. `Drink, Lord "
"Deborah Roke,4041375540383188,27-10-1979
"
"right  flank. Dwarf-mail may  be  good,  but  they will  soon be hard put  to  it. Let us "
know that  you are about the  place. But I am getting very sleepy.' Then  he 
"late,"" he grumbled. ""Here am I waiting and waiting down here, while you fellows "
"     When he had dressed, Frodo found  that while he slept the Ring had been "
"and took up their sticks, and  walked round the corner to the  west  side of "
"courtyard  of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear  he crowed,  recking "
"     'Some in the North, maybe,' Boromir broke in.  'All know in Gondor that "
"Chandler Persence,4041590292465385,17-02-1992
"
so easily!' 
"set out in two days  more,  they will draw nigh ere we depart. Moreover many "
"turned  and  twisted  off  down  the  stream,  and  out  into  the  main  current  Then  he "
####-from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over 
"     Rain may fall and wind may blow,  "
sending a hail  of  darts against the bowmen on the walls. They  gained  the 
"this. Bob  ought to learn his cat  the fiddle, and then we'd have a  dance.' "
"far  ahead were  dreary  hills,  rising  higher  and  higher, dark with trees. On some of "
"Elendil, has nought to dread! ' "
a jest is out of place.' 
"was  bending over a  pool, he felt a burning  on the back of his head) and a  "
unlike  other men: he sees far. Some  say that as he sits alone in his  high 
"Art McIlwraith,4808879470079834,11-12-1980
"
"     'Folly?'  said  Gandalf. 'Nay,  my lord, when you are a dotard you will "
cannot get  out.  We cannot get out. They have  taken the  Bridge and second 
""
place  where we have always met: Derndingle  Men  call it.  It is away south 
"""Quite  right!""  said  Balin.  ""And  I  think  I  know  which  way  we  should  go:  we "
"thinking  much  of  the  job,  but  of  what  lay  beyond  the  blue  distance,  the  quiet "
The sun was gone. Twilight lay upon the waterfalls. 
gladden  our  hearts.  But  he  brought also  word from you  to  hasten  the 
""
"and the rule  of Gondor, my lord, is mine and no other man's, unless the king  "
"robed in white, his beard now  gleaming like  pure snow in  the twinkling of "
"fell  voice was lowered,  and he  would have sweetened it if he could. ""As a  "
"     `I  do, Mr.  Frodo. Hold up  now! It's  the gate.  There's some devilry "
found only in their  proper folklands.  Nearly all Tooks  still lived in the 
gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him back. 
forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the 
thickets  where  the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees 
"Peter Peskett,4528704809520,19-02-1985
"
"here  in the  cold  and the wet, a ruffianly evening. But old Barley will no "
"What do you fear that I should say to him? Nay, Gimli,' he said  in a softer  "
"""Those  were  crows!  And  nasty  suspicious-looking  creatures  at  that,  and  rude "
     But  it  was too  late.  At that moment the rock quivered  and trembled 
"Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?  "
"learner and teacher  that often absorbed  me. The delay was, of course, also "
"'It is kingsfoil,  Sir,' he  said; 'but not fresh, I fear. It must have been "
rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.' 
"light to wear, and warm enough  or cool enough at  need.  And  you will find "
"because Frodo  was so worn by his  long pains, wound  of knife, and venomous "
"cock -a -whoop'. He cast back his cloak, flashed out his sword, and the silver  "
"to  bed;  and  while  the  dwarves  were  still  singing  songs  he  dropped  asleep,  still "
'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here. 
"faded,  and Frodo found that he was  looking  at the cool stars twinkling in "
"nightfall now. Well, take the guests' ponies to the stables, Nob! And you'll "
"Gardiner Cottem,4041591299110,21-10-1989
"
"that ever  walked since the bad old times, since the  Great Siege. Something  "
"lasting friendship from the Lord. Refuse,  and things will not seem so well. "
     Frodo  and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed  out. The  leaves 
"Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden "
altogether like  mysterious vagabonds  of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled 
What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy's hands-and here I 
"restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes  seizing a paddle and  driving "
serve you well!' 
"to be seen. `I am too  weary to decide,'  he said, shaking his head. `And  I "
and  the memory of  his  journey  was returning: the  disastrous `short cut' 
"to the  roadside, hailing  the king and the riders  from the West with  glad "
"and fro in the ways of  the City, as if going at the striking of the hour to "
"of the West were well warned by their scouts, skilled men from Henneth "
"again,  paddling  wildly  back  to  the  dark  shore;  and  such  a  rage  of  loss  and "
"trotted out the old fireside rhyme  of Oliphaunt, and the laugh had released "
"####-Soon  Fili  and  Kili  came  crawling  back,  holding  on  to  the  rocks  in  the  wind. "
"nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And   that's what I  was leading "
"     And I walk in Ambaruna, in Tauremorna, in Aldaluml. "
"     Haldir knocked  and  spoke,  and the gates  opened soundlessly; but  of "
"'wary' according  to the counsel of Gandalf, and  not to let  his tongue wag "
     thinks an island 
"     His  plan, as  far as  they  could understand  it without  knowing  the "
"     As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his hand "
black blood came gushing out. He toppled forward and came crashing down 
"that a fruit of Telperion of  many names, Eldest of Trees. Who shall say how "
"he turned to the others. `The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say: "
"     'I hope  so.  Anyway  I mean to enjoy  myself on Thursday, and  have my "
"clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone. "
"children  of  Master  Samwise.  The  most  important  copy, however,  has  a  "
"wake the turnkey yonder. He has had his share by the looks of it."" "
rippling in the wind. 
     'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!'  said Legolas  pointing. 'Down in  the 
"shaken, and  the Tower trembled from its foundations to its  proud and bitter  "
lot would  go off to Hobbiton! Folk  might  welcome  it there.' Except on the 
large iron-bound chests  of  wood. All had  been  broken and plundered;  but 
Ringwraiths. He cowered against the stony bank. 
"Anitra Dallon,4017957867203,01-11-1984
"
At that  time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we counted  Saruman 
"knew  that Gandalf, Gandalf himself, was troubled, even afraid.  The  air of "
"all, he got near the top. All the time he was wondering whether there were spiders "
"stone like the Moon, and round it were great  white walls. O yes, there were "
took it on from  here. And a message came back this afternoon saying you was 
"bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still. "
     Doner! Boner! 
"road-meeting, in the dark beyond the light of  the watch-fires on the  wall. "
"     'Hoo! Come now!' said Treebeard.  'That is a better  story! Well, well, "
about 
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too eager 
"bitter. Their spears and swords shone  in  the gloom with a gleam of chill flame, so "
"     `Well,  anyway,'  said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor  "
"     'We do not speak of dwarves or children,' said Gimli. 'Our friends were "
"East stretch out to  take you. Saruman!'  he  cried, and his voice  grew  in "
"""So here you all are still!"" he said. He picked up the hobbit and laughed: ""Not "
""
"     The  night was  old, and westward the waning moon was setting. gleaming "
"Cyrille Serchwell,4041595283128,07-06-1982
"
####-His hands are rich with gems and gold. 
"Kristien Barlthrop,4017955622927497,05-11-1992
"
"fortune! Farewell now, Master  Meriadoc! Yet maybe we  shall meet again, you  "
"light.  On  her  finger was Nenya, the ring wrought of mithril ,  that bore a  "
"spoke no word. Almost he dragged them forward. Every step was reluctant, and "
"kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?' "
"####-bowed, striving  to recall  all that Gandalf had  said to him. But  for this "
"Marshall Kruger,4749961718895,23-10-1998
"
"ships,  or  a  phalanx of flying swans; there was a red  thunderstorm  and a  "
than they mean. We fear to say too much. It robs us of the  right words when  
"the Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts - did you really see one, Sam? - "
"enough. He's no right to talk to you so.  After all you've gone  through, as "
"     'If it be truly the last, I am glad,'  said  Saruman;  'for I shall  be "
winding  up from  the lowlands in  long flickering lines.  Here and  there a  
interested in small news about Frodo's health and doings. 
"     'Walk no more in the shadows, but awake!' said Aragorn. 'You are weary. "
"     that is what  they used to say.  Things have  changed, but it is  still "
"     The  road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the "
Somebody was banging with a stick! 
"     'Faramir! Faramir!' men cried, weeping in the  streets.  But he did not "
and  he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened. Had he heard 
had  finished even Fatty Bolger heaved  a sigh  of content. They pushed back 
"said  turning  suddenly  towards  him,  and  he  was  so  flustered  that  he  answered "
"crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,' answered Gandalf grimly. "
"bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.' "
"lands: the springing and the dying,  the song  and the weeping, and the slow "
"Ring-bearer, he  heard her say,  remote  but clear, for you  I have prepared  "
"Cecile Thirlaway,4386599090791,31-05-1988
"
everything else was well tended. 
"out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand. "
"indeed!"" he laughed, and slapped his  thighs. ""No more Orcs  in Isengard, no "
"of them?' Jomer turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry that the "
"     `Ah, it is as I  said,' growled Gimli. 'It was no ordinary storm. It is "
"subdued. And, latest of  all, those returned who had passed into  Mordor and "
"Daisey Buddington,4041377449756,24-04-1995
"
morning of  pale spring that  is not yet come to womanhood. And she  now was 
on  the  brink  altogether  flummoxed  and  at  the  end  of  his  way  and  his  wits. 
 
"can't escape. Only  Elves  can escape. Away,  away out  of Middle-earth, far  "
     So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the 
and untroubled sleep.' 
Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.' 
sees a friend bound unwitting to his own  harm. But no  -- if he will go with 
"""Perhaps  the  King  under  the  Mountain  is  forging  gold,""  said  another.  ""It  is "
"     Poor Mr. Butterbur looked  troubled.  'You're right, master,' he  said, "
"the  ring beyond  doubt. Much like Gollum  with his ""birthday  present"". The "
"realm grew he looked in the Stone and was deceived: far too often, I  guess,  "
"Boromir sat muttering  to himself, sometimes biting his nails,  as  if  some "
"     Gandalf laughed. 'That is  better!' he  said. 'Well,  Thjoden. will you  "
"saw them advance in line upon line, flashing and glinting in the sunrise and "
     He listened.  The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had 
"Norri Lammiman,4017950145805,05-06-1996
"
     Until it joins some larger way 
"that star-glass  that the Lady gave you! Why,   to  think of it, we're in the "
altogether waste your time. 
sign of the odd change that seemed  to have come  over him. It did not sound 
"cruel and tall. 'And we have learned ' said the messenger, 'that  the  Black  "
it is a choice between fire and death.' 
"before our doors, we look on you as foes and thieves. "
who lived further off than an afternoon's walk. 
"deeper, it weighed heavier  on men's  hearts, and a great dread was on them.  "
"good to be  there in Spring, the  woods and fields are  full of flowers. But "
"of shadows between  two great arms of the mountains, above which three white "
shadow of the rocks; and when they saw the king they cried with glad voices:  
one at  least of  them was willing  to  tell him all he wanted  to know. But be did not 
     `Yet there are among us still  some  who have dealings  with the  Elves 
"     'Lawks!' said Merry, looking  in. The  stone floor  was swimming.  'You  "
"Dareen Andrews,4041371424863908,13-11-2001
"
"Walton Crighton,4041599109529341,18-07-1983
"
     In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring. 
"     'Oh, curse you, you stinking thing!' he said. 'Go away! Be off! I don't  "
there was  labour of many willing hands to  rebuild  and renew and to remove 
"""What about your promise then?"" "
"golden ink, that  they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides,  their "
"me uneasy,' said  Aragorn.  'The  Dark Lord  already knew  too much and  his "
"saw the  opening  of a cave. `This is the way in,' said Gollum softly. `This "
"Francisca Thorndale,4041373018209,17-10-1979
"
"that is not the  only part they have to play. They were brought  to Fangorn, "
careful  and  not to reveal that he had overheard  the debate. He let  out a  
sword with it. The shreds of the black cloak he tore off and scattered. 
"Burt Faint,4017959335043,18-05-1980
"
ending?' 
     Chapter 3   The Muster of Rohan  
"####-     Then the prince went from his horse, and knelt by the bier in honour of "
"think we  will rest here, not only today but  tonight as  well. There  is  a  "
"back  and  charged the waggons. Six were shot, but the  remainder burst out, "
     Chapter 3   The Ring Goes South   
came again. 
     But to Sam  the evening deepened to darkness as he  stood at the Haven; 
ruffian-leader. 
"come! You shall make me acquainted with this good  horse. I love beasts, and "
"going slowly,  for  the flag-stones  were cracked  and  slimed.  The riders,  "
came  on us at unawares. We drove them off after  some time;  they were many 
"that, heavy as was the dread and foreboding of those days upon the hearts of "
"was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the "
"Still,  a beggar must  be grateful,  if a thief returns him even a morsel of "
"     'I suppose you  haven't  lost us already?'  said  Pippin,  leaning back  "
had left out. 
servants also; and Grishnbkh  evidently sent some message  across  the River 
sound the horns? But where is  Aragorn?  His place is empty and  he  has not 
"Kaylee Widdop,4041599131281,20-06-1986
"
"far as lies in me under higher  authority, I declare you  free in  the realm "
again. 
     `Did I so?' said Faramir. 
from the North. 
Gandalf. 
"them, barring their way to the East, the terrible forest of Mirkwood. "
"     His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought. "
"could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To  ride with him to  "
"Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.' "
"crawling, stooping, now picking  a doubtful way very slowly, now hurrying at "
""
off the big gang down  that way; but he's sent Mr Peregrin back with all the 
to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they picked up the trail of the 
"stiffly  on  the  ground  before  them,  slowly  flapped  his wings,  and  bobbed  towards "
"the  storm  comes,  and now all  friends should  gather together,  lest each "
the boat put about. Frodo was  just  in time to grasp Sam by  the hair as he 
"your homes, you would not have been able to pass  that  way. But come!  Your "
"Bette Bills,4041370373946,23-11-1981
"
throats of those that they threw down. 
"Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a  branch,  or  stick  a root "
"expected you  to go sooner, and lately we have  been very  anxious.  We have "
"Sonya Itzhak,4041374524429,24-03-1991
"
####-been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come to Hobbiton at 
"""Who calls it? Who knows it?"" "
what is to be done. What food have we got left?' 
losing his temper.' 
     He looked up  and the mist before his eyes  cleared a little. There was 
"sent  for Jomer; and he went down with him  from the  City, and they came to "
"Odele Brou,4041595195843,16-10-1984
"
"expect  they were a kind of  'purple emperor,' a butterfly  that  loves  the  tops of oak-"
     New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River;  and  
""
"     Of N®menor he spoke, its glory  and its fall,  and the  return  of  the "
blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades 
""
"     'I can guess some of it,' said Sam gloomily. 'What I saw in the Mirror: "
Saw an eye in a green face. 
arm. Suddenly he  lifted the blade  and swung it shimmering and whistling in 
Aragorn. 
"had  stopped,  and  the  last  faint  crashes  could  be  heard  as  the  largest  of  the "
""
"     `Look, my friends!' he called.  `H ere's a pretty hobbit -skin to wrap an "
night after another and a stranger thing befell me. 
"to Sauron, who covets it. "
"voice sank to a whisper, 'the Ring draws them.' "
Very  soon a grey patch came up  in  the darkness ahead. He heard  the creak of 
"and  thymes that grew in  bushes, or with their woody creeping stems mantled "
all have come we will speak together.' 
"     'Yes, Sam, Strider,'  said Aragorn. 'It is a long way, is  it not, from "
"Coralyn Impey,4041593215023,27-10-1979
"
seemed  unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But  after a time the  trees 
"pulled  him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off his head. Then "
had  been  a  chance!  It  looked  as  if  he  would  certainly  lose  his  friends  this  time 
"They were  four  days  gone,  and  by  that  time  they  knew  that  the  joined  armies "
"Lucille Stockle,4041592464440,19-05-1991
"
""
were wearing it.  I have a fancy it would turn even the  knives of the Black  
"good, and  the  houses were filled with men  and women  and  the laughter of "
"pans with water, and bring  'em back!  ' "
"man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for  "
"     'Well, not very well, Mr. Frodo.' "
"####-     'Why so, and not  Boromir, prince of the City that the  sons of Elendil "
"     'Here, alas! I must do you  a discourtesy,' said  Faramir.  ""I hope you  "
"down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was soft and wet. Mist "
"better now. Anyway, this is what happened.' "
"next  morning  we  went to  Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is,  and  the "
"Theresita Duckwith,4012353622492,01-01-1984
"
"Three Rings,  which Sauron  has never touched,  would  then become free, and "
hidden  in  the deepest holes  they could  find; and  the Wargs had vanished  from  the 
     Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed 
     Of Amroth evermore. 
the cellar. 
"they reached the trees, and found that they stood in a great  roofless ring, "
"Amitie Dallan,4041371881699159,25-01-1986
"
"failing.  Two  of  Maggot's  sons  and his  three  daughters came in, and  a  "
"sorcery, and knew much of the mind of Sauron; and he was more cruel than "
"heard him talking to a  stranger, who  seemed to  be inquiring for me, and I "
on. But we must  go on; and it is no good our  delaying  the passage  of the 
""
"angry goblins just behind! On we go!"" "
     `If you can think of any way  we could have both used the rope and  yet 
aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.' 
"####-songs passed into the tongues of  Men. But we made  no songs about it, being "
"well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end "
"in silence.  'Good evening, Mrs. Cotton!' he said.  'Hullo Rosie!' "
we've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful 
"of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin,  in Lurien "
"     Mr. Butterbur had at  any rate not  changed his manner  of talking, and "
should 
"all the  birds are to be trusted,  and there are other spies more  evil than "
"tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in "
####-some mischief still in a small mean way.' 
"rules  them,  Brand son of Bain  son of Bard. He is a  strong king.  and his "
hundred wild  cats  and wolves being  roasted  slowly  alive  together would not have 
fingers  with  a  sigh.  Thorin  was  not  least  among  these;  but  always  he  searched 
and love all things that  grow and are not barren.' And again  she looked at 
     But   Sam  did   not  answer:  he  was   staring  back  up  the  cliff.  
"     'That is what we call ourselves,' said Pippin. "
####-none of the Company had reached the city when you left.' 
"it up. And they  did  so, and  lifting  up the  bed  they  bore it from  the "
"horses, and the clouds, and the  unfolding of the world. What  is going  on?  "
wisdom to their children. I knew many among the ravens of the rocks when I was 
"hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured. It  was sparely furnished, having but "
"there's  dark shapes in the woods, dreadful  things that it makes the  blood "
"open one eye, and listen, when a part of the story which he did not yet know came "
"     `Ach,  sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste  less speed.  We musstn't "
"     'All right, all right! I'm here. But I can't see.' "
"     And as they stood so, their hands met and  clasped, though they did not "
"     Fire and lamp, and meat and bread, "
"     Sam did not laugh. `I may not be much good at climbing, Mr.  Frodo,' he "
"you, I or those that remember me.' "
"ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you  in Moria. Will you not tell "
"always  in  the  Master's  name,  and  he  had  a  hard  task  to  govern  the  people  and "
"     'It's coming out in a minute,' whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded. "
"Under cloud and under star,  "
"private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought "
"     'Alas!'  said Legolas, coming to  Aragorn's  side. 'We have  hunted and "
####-wells of deep memory. 
came an unexpected relief.  They were out on the plain now and drawing  near 
"     'I am all right,'  said Frodo, reluctant  to have his garments touched. "
"boom, "
"     And  Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: 'Here  lie many that are "
the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!' 
"nor did he  think much of old songs, giving his mind  to  .trade and tolls, to cargoes "
"####-     Sam looked at his  master with approval, but also with surprise:  there "
     Jomer  and  the king  spoke  together  in their  own  tongue. At length 
"indeed be splendid!"" "
"     'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,' said Legolas; `of  all elf-banes the most  "
"Slays king, ruins town, "
"just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has "
"Ezmeralda Ware,4041597295021,25-12-1982
"
"     ' ""Tired?"" he said, ""tired? Well  no, not tired, but stiff.  I  need  a  "
     All things  were  now  made  ready  in  the City; and there  was  great 
begin life  at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are 
of the Old Took's  daughters); and Mr.  Drogo  was his second cousin. So Mr. 
"Rebeca Bidder,4017952905655127,25-06-1982
"
""
consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.' 
good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.' 
"     There beryl, pearl, and opal pale, "
"could long  endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root, "
stopped short. He thought that he had heard a faint voice answering him. But 
"Robers Giblin,4017953852689937,14-05-1988
"
"that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense, looking back northwards "
destroying? Why should we not think  that the  Great Ring  has come into our 
     To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. 'Almost the last drop of the Smaug 
"Mella Garey,4017951522663,24-09-1978
"
"like rank weed over his bony brows, his nose was snivelling. "
"high reeds, and they  stumbled after him  as quickly as they could. But in a  "
"dome after  dome,  stair beyond  stair; and still  the winding paths lead on "
the ships blew all their clamour away. 
""
"Legolas and Gimli, who  had now become fast friends. In this last boat  most "
power there  came  to  his mind another thought: Take it off!  Take  it off! 
"Willow Inggall,4041590486955308,17-07-2000
"
"     As they  came  to the opening in the wood, they were surprised  to  see "
bent his bow and fitted an arrow in case any hidden guardian of the boat appeared. 
"rest: a Rider, all black, save that on his  hooded head he had a helm like a  "
     Frodo sighed and turned back southward. As if to  mark his disregard of 
"Gandalf could  have  heard; but his  uneasiness wore  off, and in  the  fine  "
not darken  our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the 
""
"     There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in "
connected  it  with the  ring  at all. He took  all  the credit  for that to 
"galloping over  the plain.  The sunset gilded their spears  and helmets, and "
     Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath! 
And  with  that  Ya  hoy!  the  flames  were  under  Gandalf’s  tree.  In  a moment  it 
shall roast him. 
their  original  colour  could hardly be guessed: it might  have  been  dark 
indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of 
     `Come  back!  Come  back! '  he heard Sam's voice out  of the blackness 
"water with all this baggage, and  the Great River is swift. I do not wish to "
"Joscelin M'cowis,4327529405394,10-03-1996
"
my liege-lord and healer!' 
"bones and skin hanging on a tree. Ugh! he's got a sting has he? Well, we'll get him "
"####-him and known the grief that  his escape would bring, he might have quailed. "
this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!' 
####-as long as you don't make a noise.' 
"go that way. That is the  only other way, For the mountains are lower there, "
"     'Well! '  said  Frodo, standing up and drawing  his cloak more  closely "
     And his bootless foot is lasting lame; 
"beside those who lay upon the field, he sighed, and he cast  his cloak about "
"arguing but you. I'd like to know."" "
     Tinbone! Thinbone! 
winding eastward among woods and heather -covered slopes towards the Ford 
"Weidar April,4690661404663458,17-02-1983
"
"Legolas,  'the hunters  can  per haps learn the  answers  to  their own small "
"     `I said to myself: ""dreaming again, Sam Gamgee,"" I said: and  I said no "
"next  five years I  found that the story could  not now be  wholly abandoned,  "
"Allissa Ubsdall,4041375748854931,22-05-1979
"
"Yank Squirrell,4815875902540394,04-10-1986
"
"every excuse, even his lord's command, to  stay behind. He wondered, too, if "
"Zane Chominski,4041373241413,14-07-1983
"
them  away  and  they  fled  off  down  the  slopes  crying  and  yammering  and  looking 
"     'I  do not doubt you,' said Haldir. 'Yet this is our law. I am  not the "
"####-four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West -door to "
"none of ours  got out. Lagduf and Muzgash ran through, but they were shot. I "
"again a dull  red light flickered up under  the lowering  clouds, and for  a  "
"through all the lands of the kings  from Arnor to  Gondor, and about all the "
need of you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.' 
know who this Wormtongue is. Was he really the king's counsellor?' 
"     For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen, "
The hobbits thought he would never stop. 
     The Men took one step forward  and stopped short. There rose a  roar of 
"Enemy is doing  before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he  said. "
"Stefa Brawson,4041375443942,27-05-1979
"
"dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent is terrifying. Their fingers,  "
"     Though wind may blow and rain may fall, "
"soon as  I  saw  your  funny  faces  on  the  door-step,  I had my doubts. But  treat  it as "
"dangerous  as  he  had been  brought  up  to  believe,  they were  far  more "
And are not the bridges  of Osgiliath broken down  and all the landings held 
"Elora Vida,4080130343447397,31-07-2000
"
more fair without it. Come back! Leave your game and  sit down beside me! 
"of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air. "
"""Stop!  stop!""  shouted  Thorin;  but  it  was  too  late,  the  excited  dwarves  had "
very much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will  not think of dying until he 
"Bobbi Caizley,4017957041971726,23-04-1985
"
 
####-Erestor. `It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.' 
the  emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke  as of fire and battle 
assistance of material  collected by Meriadoc. Though  the dates  given  are 
the wise cannot see all ends. 
"folk. There was another smaller door on the other side of the chamber, under  "
"     'That may  be so,' said Gandalf.  'Small comfort will those two have in "
"     Then the  guards stepped forward, and Faramir opened the casket, and he "
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't  
"     'And  I,'  said  Legolas, 'shall walk in  the woods of this  fair land, "
     'Now then!' said Ugl®k.  'None of that!  Hold your tongues. No  talk to 
something  like  it  which  shows  he  was  a  wise  elf  and  wiser  than  the  men  of  the 
a shout he halted the whole company. 
"with drawn swords sitting just inside the door, and watching it with wide eyes, and "
"and  storming like a howling gale, breaking pillars,  hurling avalanches  of "
"Legolas. There will always  be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise "
"on the wretch.  We might make him useful. But if I cannot, we shall have  to "
"gradually northward,  as  they  struggled  on.  Along  its  brink there  now "
Sorceress of the Golden Wood?'  said Wormtongue. 'It  is not  to be wondered 
swished his tail and said nothing. 
"     'Neither did the Council,' said Frodo. 'Nor do  I. I would have nothing "
that had before  been rare  among hobbits.  The fruit was so  plentiful that 
wind  that he had blessed  he  now  called accursed. But the hosts of Mordor  
a twig or the rustle of a leaf they passed and vanished. 
though they  rather  dreaded  the  after -dinner  speech  of their  host  (an 
"instance. He  has an evil name in the Bree-land,  and queer folk call at his "
"fires, that has so angered us; and the  treachery of a neighbour, who should "
"Raye Keysall,4017952110831,12-05-1985
"
 
"     'What's all this,' he snarled as he  came  forward. 'Gate-breaking? You  "
two great kings  of stone: still with blurred eyes and  crannied  brows they 
and 
"their spirits.  After  a time, as the stars  grew thicker and  brighter, the "
"Marlyn Moff,4041595683515185,29-09-1990
"
"came from  the North,  and  soon it  freshened to a  rising breeze. All  the "
"Aloin Aitchison,4041592532139,29-04-1985
"
"down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. 'I haven't seen or thought "
"     'Some have accused  you, Mithrandir,  of  delighting to bear ill news,' "
go 
"Gondor: The hands of the  king are  the hands of a healer, and  so shall the "
"door was open, just as if he had been invited. "
"     But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony, "
 
"you hang from  a  gibbet at  your  window for the sport of your own crows, I "
"####-     The others looked in the  direction  that  Merry  pointed out, but they "
Sting: it flashed and glittered  like a  blue  flame  and then  slowly faded 
"to  be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have  come a long way with you and "
"     'Well, luck did not let me  down,' muttered Sam,  'but that was a  near "
like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were  the words.  He has gone  off 
saw no sign of it. There they sat for a long while and did not dare to make a move. 
fumbled inside. 
"####-seemed to be  a note of haste or fear  in his call, and they saw tha t he was "
"seemed to  be bringing up the rear, debating as they went. "
through that at any time.' 
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting 
"divided  into  three  somewhat   different  breeds:  Harfoots,  Stoors,  and "
"about  the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and "
hundreds  of  miles. Therefore Boromir  will also be in the Company. He is a 
"had ridden for some five hours and  were far out upon the western plain, yet  "
struck? 
"crossed  by travellers with baggage between Lurien and Gondor, save by boat. "
silence. Faramir signed to Frodo and Sam that they should do likewise. 
Old fat spider can't see me! 
""
     'But how did he find that out?' asked Frodo. 
was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the  road began to 
heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and 
"Thrain, son of  Thror,  I believe), and  that your companion  is  respectable, and  that "
     'No!'  Pippin laughed. 'Don't  believe what strangers say of themselves 
"secrecy, he closed  his  hand about the precious Phial  which he still bore. "
"domed chamber in the midst of the roof, with low doors facing east and west. "
"Bilbo and Frodo were related, with  the addition of a  few special unrelated "
"Kerrie Limon,4041590262069,06-05-1981
"
"my own front-hall at home!"" "
"Bidget Mitcham,4041593228216,24-08-1992
"
"grim,  hard,  cold  words,  heartless and miserable. The night  was  railing "
"Isengard.  The more  I consider it, the more curious I find it. I have never  "
"meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you  are  making a valiant offer. "
"I know where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.' "
"Redhorn Gate,  and stumbled  wearily down the  slope. Caradhras had defeated "
"slipped from his finger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him and killed him "
that he could not find nor remember what it looked like. 
"the  Enemy himself,'  said  Strider. 'But do not give  up  hope! Gandalf  is "
"     Soon  he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted,  gasping "
"dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not expecting you."" "
"shadows of the  Shire, and  the music  of the Elves as  it came  through his "
"charged  the ruffians. Merry himself slew  the  leader, a  great squint -eyed "
acknowledged our sway. But that is long since. 'Tis many lives of  Men since 
and then suddenly became grave again. 
And down down to Goblin -town  
"     Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best! "
""
"Blayne Dawbury,4485827087346,01-02-1983
"
"them.  A shuddering howl  broke from him, as if he  were a captain summoning "
""
"     'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to  say so, rather  a burning "
the  West.  They have helped  me  before; and I shall need their help in the 
"gangrels that began coming up the Greenway  last year,  as you may remember; "
"more,  though  that ought  to be enough. Some say  that he  is a bear descended from "
"Antonietta Dewen,4041598113322,14-01-1999
"
"Joyan Ziebart,4041593696075099,29-10-1981
"
"conclusion. If it had inspired  or  directed  the development of the legend, "
"Adrienne Valintine,4041594900360061,07-02-1993
"
"Adele Caldron,4041372332163,21-09-1994
"
"beeches came right down to the bank, till their feet were in the stream. Across this "
"Irene Middiff,4041371132416,10-10-1983
"
came and  still  the  Ents  held conclave under hurrying  clouds  and fitful 
"Nata Ricco,4041371039314,11-06-1979
"
Thorin. He thought Tom was talking. 
"     'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew "
is too clever a waterman. 
"the river,  and men had  made it high and strong; for at  that point, upon a  "
"mere. There was a faint hiss, a noisome smell went up, the  lights flickered "
"     'The  murder  of  Deal haunted  Gollum,  and he had made  up a defence, "
"messages came to me out of Lurien that Aragorn had passed that way, and that "
"eastward,  but  was delved in the  heart of the rock; thence a long lamp-lit "
darkness!' 
gravely and her eyes  were  kind. 'I know  not what in  these days you  have 
"have done this morning, we shall have left  the Downs before the Sun sets and "
"counsel here. But you, Thjoden Lord  of  the Mark  of Rohan are  declared by "
"caverns  once  more,  and  found,  as  they  expected,  that  only  the  Front  Gate "
"'This ring!' he stammered. 'How, how on earth did it come to me?' "
"all  the land in  ruin and tumult  beneath them, and before them Mount  Doom "
"Enos Campe,4939543125350,05-01-1989
"
"Jo Cure,4041597329092652,06-04-1994
"
"     But the  doors lay  hurled and twisted  on the ground.  And  all about, "
"it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before. "
"the boughs were almost bare, and a great  curtain  of rain  veiled Bree Hill "
####-used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been  too drowsy to walk   far 
"     Pippin's face was anxious. 'Well, you had better come with me  as quick  "
"foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They  "
"was neither  very  fat nor very  timid; indeed,  though he did not  know it, "
its battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the hills on either side 
the coming of the King. Merry was summoned and rode away with the wains 
"It  was  not  a  pleasant  thought!  They  crept  further  down  the  tunnel,  and  there "
####-dived.  Then he lifted his  eyes and gazed far away. The world was quiet and  
"to  persuade you. Or until  it is found in your despite, and  the Ruler  has "
"West, and  the great clouds  were lifted  high,  floating away eastward; but "
"which they  were  going.  The banks of  the stream sank,  as it reached  the "
"end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns behind. We "
"blame on me, if you  will.  You  can say that I was too strong and took it by "
"Chandra Gronw,4041594698730,22-03-1984
"
further already than they had expected. Certainly the distances  had now all 
"they had passed away out of sight down the great road to the Causeway, Merry "
"tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shathyr. "
"the threatening mountain, 'and that'll take a week, if it takes  a day, with "
after may have clean earth to till. What weather they shall have is not ours 
"Merry, and kicked Wormtongue, and went away towards the wood. "
"interruptions had really made Beorn more interested in the story, and the story had "
"Brynne Martinyuk,4041591572469451,26-02-1979
"
armed and assembled. 
"for  the Arkenstone, yet he had  an  eye  for many  another wonderful  thing  that was "
"asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that merely passed by;  "
     Across the streaming tide. 
"restful, peaceful, gliding upon  the bosom of the  flowing water. The stream "
"which this wanderer chooses to return. Why indeed  should  we  welcome  you, "
am going to try and find.' 
"were no paths. They made north-west, slanting away from the River Running, and "
"Lydia Ripper,4041376355810810,15-12-1987
"
under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west 
"     'But the night  will be too  short,' said  Gandalf.  'I have  come back  "
"Jeanelle Sweatland,4017952494375,29-07-1985
"
"remained  that  the  Tooks  were  not  as  respectable  as  the  Bagginses,  though  they "
""
"work.  He's on the stairs. And until he's off them, I'm not going  down. Not "
     No  choice was left them but to play their part  to  its end. Therefore 
     Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why  the fact 
"looked down  upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green  mounds,  "
"seems,  when  the  time  comes.  I  am  sure  we  are  all  for  ever  at  your  service, "
"of the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not "
####-their blood.  Out  here  in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced 
"Dropping the leaf, he took a corner of the   lembas  and nibbled it. He spat, "
"Lil Treeby,4017952336362160,25-08-1979
"
"South. Then  they  learned of  the death of Smaug,  and  joy was  in  their hearts:  and "
moving this way.' 
"boughs were rotting  in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets,  "
days  that follow and in our  dealings with the Enemy.' And they agreed upon 
the stairs of Orthanc-with  hobbits at my tail. Or that  an heir  of Elendil 
"     `I  should look -- well, I don't think I should look right in it,' said "
     Chapter 12  Flight to the Ford   
earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was their favourite haunt. 
But at  last unexpectedly  they  found what  they were seeking. Fili and Kili and 
"     `There  it lies,' he said,  pointing away south-eastwards to where  the "
"repeated  by  everybody.  Then  the  rain  began  to  pour  down  worse  than  ever,  and "
"""Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you. In fact I will go so far as "
"that  was all. 'And not a wrap or a blanket,' said Merry.  'We shall be cold "
"     'That would not help us now,' said Frodo. `Come! Let us see what  Sting "
"and  again they heard a dull  rumble,  as a gr eat  boulder rolled  down from "
for they were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and arrows.  
light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether. 
keys. Quickbeam has them.' 
""
moment most of  them took it for granted that his disappearance was  nothing 
"Verene Huckfield,4017952340770820,03-07-1976
"
Dwalin appeared and bowed so low that their beards swept the stone floor. The big 
     'But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbour: I cannot overlook him. I must  
"and  very  bright  eyes  under  his  dark-green hood.  As  soon a  the door was opened, "
"crime  to  be  lost  in  the  forest,  to  be  hungry  and  thirsty,  to  be  trapped  by  spiders? "
"least,  and  two  even  for Bilbo;  and  they were  all  grabbed  and  carried  through  the "
"Raffarty Pinock,4363177265240076,17-11-1976
"
"an end  to his Precious for good and all, there'd be trouble pretty quick, I "
speak. 
     O! Wanderers in the shadowed land 
it?' 
"were densely clad in dark glossy leaves like thornless holly, and  they bore "
"to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too.' "
"     'We  surely aren't going  to stay here for the night,  are we, sir?' he "
"Roads go ever ever on, "
"Nate Lavington,4509487165057446,27-09-1987
"
defeated at la st. They did not doubt that he would accept. 
"and  cringed, and  rubbed his  long hands, licking his  fingers  as if  they "
"not a  trace left, I say. I've lost the scent through  giving way to you. It "
The melody of harps they wrung. 
"Hoebart Bellenger,4769373958879789,28-08-1981
"
shadow lay. 
""
equalled the sights that night. At the twanging of the bows and the shrilling of the 
"     'Which way would they turn, do you  think?' said Legolas. 'Northward to "
"glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once. "
     Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall the 
"shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil, and there leaned  up, "
"`Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?' "
     `Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if  he was the only one then 
"     The  host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode "
"Arty Gauler,4041378064764809,07-02-1994
"
"Garald Dunstone,4017958877508,23-06-1975
"
     to hidden land forlorn he went. 
"Felicle Wandrich,4041372948315,08-08-1987
"
"is  variable, ranging between two and  four feet of our measure. They seldom "
"Suddenly its harsh bell clanged  again, and  then broke  into  a  shattering "
the Three Hunters!' 
or  at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the  air. In  that case 
sound or presence  had disturbed  him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert 
"     'Yes, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no need to get angry.' "
"as he had not known for many years,  and the remainder of his chosen company "
     He  stepped  up beside the silent sentinel on the dark  edge. and Frodo 
"     One of the first  things done in Hobbiton,  before even  the removal of "
head out of the  encircling wood. The  path seemed to be making directly for  
####-out of the great perils bringing the miserable creature with him. 
"little to run the  better. And if we  rest, then the blind night is the time "
winding up the turret along the inside of its round outer wall. A  torch was 
"standing  at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they "
upper 
"""Yer can try,"" said Bert, picking up a skewer.  "
"Lamond Hassall,4221210878899079,14-03-1975
"
as it ought to be. 
     He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee  in the  kitchen. It had 
"     'I  am  so sleepy,' he said,  'that soon I shall fall down on the road. "
see  his friends. The Riders  behind  were  falling  back:  even their great 
revealed; for l showed the blade re-forged  to him. He is not so mighty   yet 
"brooded  for  ages  on  this  one  thing,  and  he  was  always  afraid  of  its  being  stolen. "
"this  time,' he said.  'Shadowfax shall show you his  paces.' Then he ran to "
"too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it. "
     o'er leagues unlit and foundered shores 
Mark and Gandalf  will ride  to  the northern wall  they will find Treebeard 
"     'Yes,  it  is  old,'  said  Aragorn,  'as  old  as the  forest  by  the "
may now say. They are not idle. But they were  not made as weapons of war or  
"you, and what's all this to-do? ' "
"     `We haven't got there yet,' said Frodo. "
"crawl  out  of  the  great  gate  and  come  by  night  to  Dale,  and  carry  away  people, "
to grow stronger as all grew quiet.  Pippin felt  again its  weight  in  his 
"him his father sat, and said nothing, but watched, and gave  no  longer  any "
tallest. What is your father?' 
     Frodo felt a  strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once 
"come  into  this  tale; and anyway goblins don't care who  they catch, as  long as  it  is "
and right in their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom. 
"Brandyn Di Claudio,4041593054398,07-05-1984
"
to free  my  hands. These loops are only  left for show. You'd better have a  
darkness  about him and a  blackness of  despair and  anger in his heart. it 
terrible vision was removed. The Eye was not  turned to them:  it was gazing 
"shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soon "
"Antonie Abramchik,4987474221631324,06-08-1983
"
opening. There the hobbits took what  they expected would be their last meal 
"again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!' "
daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the first time in the  full light of day 
"Now  they  all  pushed  together,  and  slowly  a  part  of  the  rock-wall  gave  way. "
     Thy starlight on the Western Seas. 
are we to avoid being spitted?' 
came.' 
"of fiery light upon the  black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or  "
love that the horses of the Rangers bore for their riders was  so great that 
hose:  linen;  various  small  belongings  of his  master's that  Frodo  had 
"Kathryne Wanell,4041376717237,29-06-1993
"
""
"     They climbed down  and out  of the dike and through a gap  in the wall, "
     Frodo drew the Ring  out of his pocket again and looked  at it. It  now 
"those were good days for us, and the poorest of us had money to spend and to lend, "
with clear glass;  cities.  such as  the  mind  of Durin  could  scarce have 
"####-and  among these they  found that there had been built a wooden platform, or "
"step were stone-hewn  sea,  There sat other  guards,  with drawn swords laid "
""
dwarves and other odd  folk  that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose 
####-now  rather  tolerated (in  the  rich) than  generally  approved. The custom 
wi th 
"Zola Kitcherside,4017953720943,13-02-1982
"
"Boycie Greste,4041379183840611,25-09-1988
"
     'And  more  deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up a  
"####-no, how silly  of me! That's what you went for, wasn't it: to get rid of it?  "
"another. Often they floundered, stepping or  falling hands-first into waters "
and  particularly  the  orderly  and  prosperous;  in  some  parts  wicked  dwarves  had 
"""I am Gandalf,"" said the wizard. "
"orcs  must be at war among themselves, Shagrat and Gorbag had come to "
dig a hole in any bank and  stay only as long as it suited them.  But in the 
Gimli's dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the  light step of Legolas; 
onslaught of the war that comes.' 
and  I  am  yet  the  servant  of  their Master.  I would  speak  for  him  and  ask whether 
horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat. 
or fled before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them. Their backs were to 
waiting for you inside. But now Fili and Kill's news seemed good enough. So they 
and it still does.' 
"with every mile, even if you find a path.' "
"discovered. Not yet.' He turned and climbed swiftly down, and  they followed "
"Jamaal Campey,4017959781907,08-12-1979
"
dare  to  leave his post: he is on  guard. And what can  he  do  anyway?' So 
"darkness took me; and I strayed out  of thought and time, and I wandered far  "
And harps of gold; where no man delves 
     To the  centre  all the roads ran between  their chains. There stood  a  
"confusticate him!"" "
"up, like a flash of silver. It was already dark. but I could see the rider's "
"Othello Tynnan,4041373722810821,07-04-2000
"
"fuel; for Strider said  that Frodo must be kept warm,  especially at  night, "
stream that flowed from the Valley of the Wraiths.  
"man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Legolas. Can you  "
"farewells  and  promising  to  repay  the  lord  of  the  eagles  if  ever  they  could,  as  off "
after 
"proceeded  in  advance  to  make  requisite  preparations,  and  shall  await  your "
"earthenware, white water -lilies  were  floating,  so that she  seemed  to be "
"     'There is more than one horse coming,' said Aragorn. "
     'Who's they?' 
`I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer.  And you  
"smokes, and lights.  His real business was far more difficult and dangerous, "
"side. The wind  had fallen  the day before  as it shifted from the West, and "
""
     As his story was unfolded of his meeting with Frodo and his servant and 
"dream of food, if I can't get it any other way. I hope I never wake up again."" "
"Bethena O'Loughane,4041592567408,31-01-1989
"
"knows. For do I not guess rightly, Aragorn, that you have shown  yourself to "
""
"Jannelle Hiskey,4398695212859234,19-03-1995
"
"could not imagine sharing  a name without being  related, they took Frodo to  "
"Hector Ballach,4865146376738,01-08-1993
"
"Barr Haquin,4017957473277196,03-06-1983
"
"'Leastways, if  it wasn't  him, then there's two of him. I went away to find "
"     'There  are indeed,' said Pippin turning towards him. 'And  we'll begin "
"amended, so strong and gay a sp irit is in him. His grief he will not forget; "
     to Elvenhome the green and fair 
"assure  you  there  is  a  mark  on  this  door-the  usual  one  in  the  trade,  or used  to be. "
"in build; their feet  and hands were larger,  and they preferred flat  lands "
"Diena Wimms,4017953787454,25-03-1988
"
"'S is for Saruman, I  guess,'  he  said at length. 'There  is evil afoot  in "
"####-mountains, until the Darkness  came and King Thjoden arose  and rode through "
hobbits that the  fragrance  of the air grew as they went  forward; and from 
understand  it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It was never 
"claim, until  it be seen whether we or Mordor shall prevail. Men shall pitch "
"ahead, and forcing their  aching knees  to bend and  straighten; and ever as "
"chance brought  me then,  if  chance  you call it.  It was no  plan of mine, "
threshold. Sam sprang over the body and went in; and then he peered about at 
"he bore me away, before Saruman was aware.  I was far from Isengard, ere the "
"finding at last the hem of the great slow-rolling pall of cloud, and falling "
"let  him pass.  He's been up the Stairs once  or twice since then, but we've "
"arrive,' said Merry.  'Well, see you later - the day  after tomorrow,  if you  "
"     Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed "
"the  bend less  than  a mile away,  and they  were moving fast: too fast for  "
"     'I can manage it,' said Frodo. 'I must.' "
it.  To  smell  apples  everlastingly  when  you  can  scarcely  move  and  are  cold  and 
there  had  for the present been nothing  to guard against. They were at any 
"it  would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to go and get lost  "
But  the enchanted desire of  the hoard had  fallen  from Bilbo. All  through  their 
"upon  them, and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of  man or "
"of  the hobbits. All that day  they  walked  about in  the  woods with  him, "
"hill, as the first  light of dawn came dimly in the  sky. Their enemies were "
them uncovered a small lamp that  gave out a slender silver beam. He held it 
"suggestion came to him from outside,  from someone or  something a the room. "
"mountain-maggots  on  a trip, only half trained. Run, curse  you! Run  while "
love between us.' 
"well hidden in  shadows  and kept so  still, that  I could not see them. The "
"never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.' "
"Nicky Viveash,4041378160535,04-01-1978
"
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like sniffing: and something seemed 
""
it. And when I bid you thrust in  a torch. Do this and speak no more to  me. 
stone for food. They  went through Dr®adan  to Rimmon with great wains. 
""
hobbits.' 
"""We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, and first, "
""
     And so it was settled. Sam Gamgee married Rose Cotton in the Spring  of 
"Bombur is drowning!"" he cried. It was only too true. Bombur had only one foot on "
dwarf-make. 
Down the swift dark stream you go 
"great Riders, nor take joy only in the songs of slaying. I will be a healer, "
"Daisey Ravilus,4181522466941776,14-03-1990
"
     Chapter 7   The Mirror of Galadriel   
gathering together! 
"     'And yet we need great haste,' said Jomer. 'Mundburg is on fire!' "
"     'Maybe  he was called,' said  Thjoden;  'and my  heart  tells me that I "
"Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.' "
     The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight. 
"reckless of their loss as they  approached, still bunched and herded, within "
"Cull Pagon,4041594079858259,11-05-1976
"
sailing clouds passing over the  floor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents 
himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering. 
"     Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man "
"Linc Finneran,4041593723836,03-08-1999
"
"####-Some  of  the  verses  were  like  this,  but  there  were  many  more,  and  their  singing "
take care at first! ' 
"upper  armouries of  Third  Deep,  something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin "
"Bless  me,  how  they  jumped!  Then  they  shouted  with  surprise  and  delight. "
you ask for help?' He lifted his staff and pointed to a  high  window. There 
"     He advanced down the passage, but slowly now, each step more reluctant. "
"     From the North shall he come, need shall drive him: "
"     When the Captains were but two days gone, the Lady Jowyn bade the "
""
"due to their venture.  It began yestereve, and all Ithilien was under sha dow "
"     'Here!'  said a voice, deep and cold,  that seemed  to come out of  the "
"Minas  Tirith has  for long  years  been so hardy  in  toil, so  onward into "
"Wells Wehner,4017954508127652,29-10-1984
"
"North. At their feet the ground was dry and the turf short, but a long strip "
"doom  still hung! It seemed to Legolas, as he  strained his farseeing  eyes, "
"him was stifling, and he began to gasp with thirst. On, on they went, and he "
"near loomed the great rampart of Cirith Gorgor, and the Black Gate amidmost, "
Smjagol. though no one tells him what it is  all about. Smjagol helps again. 
and when  she  heard of the battle in Helm's Deep and the great slaughter of 
Ill  news came soon  again.  The  passage of  Anduin was won  by  the Enemy. 
drove away the Black Rider in the trees.  
"aside and  vanished  into the  shadows. The others gave way, and one stepped "
"Agneta Coulthard,4653321014583,26-05-1980
"
""
of the hills. A peak and isle of rock  it was. black and gleaming hard: four 
"     `Rope! ' muttered Sam. `I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it! ' "
"it comes from. You would not give a pipeful to a beggar, would you?' "
They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden 
suppose he's no good to eat:  she wouldn't  worry about words from High  Up. 
"sad. Slowly  the dawn grew  to a  pale light, diffused and shadowless. There "
"forest  after  breakfast  (a  very  poor  one),  and  it  had  seemed  as  dark  in  there  in  the "
"     But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me, "
"Connie Fochs,4017952516879538,26-06-2000
"
heart  could  mourn for summer  or  for spring.  No  blemish  or sickness or  
from the Shire these days. But I'll do what I can.' 
"were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging  at Frodo's sleeve,  "
"going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that "
jumped up  with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of  the secret than you do. 
"####-hope  too much!  These are dark  days.' He  went  swiftly away,  leaving the "
""
""
"passed  through another  gateway, high-arched and broad, and a rill  ran out "
     Now he tried to find strength to tear himself  away and go  on a lonely 
     'Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?' said Pippin. 'Destroy  him I should 
"dared  to move,  dreading lest  the deadly eyes should fall  on him. Slowly, "
"Verene Cully,4190586782591945,16-01-1990
"
"Elyssa Meakes,4041379645500,08-09-1977
"
"     Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had  been watching "
"     When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air, "
"Giovanni Castanone,4041379201646719,10-10-1997
"
"there were streams and springs along  the road. ""But your way  through Mirkwood "
"""The  summer  is  getting  on  down  below,""  thought  Bilbo,  ""and  haymaking  is "
footstool. Then Gandalf spoke. 
comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on  the borders he would  
"far away, beyond sad Gondor now overwhelmed in shade,  the  Sun was "
"folk shall remove hither; and when we come it shall be blessed, for a while. "
rhymes of old days which women such as our good Ioreth still repeat  without 
     'Mr. Merry!' he cried. 
"City,  ran to  the bells and tolled the alarm;  and  some blew the  trumpets "
the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.' 
"shadow. Perhaps it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged "
rend. 
down  the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand 
     There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to 
as 
 
 
####-chief among them. `Elves do not  walk in Ithilien in these  days.  And Elves  
doors that are shut.' 
"in his  eyes of mingled wonder and  respect and  hatred.  'You  have  grown, "
"Sam stood. It  was open but dark, and from just within its shadow the voices "
"Thorin! Why do you fence yourself like a robber in his hold? We are not yet foes, "
leather -bound  manuscript; and  also a large bulky  envelope.  The  book and  
"Skylar Ponnsett,4017955215207,17-09-1988
"
     Merry breathed a sigh of relief. He had thought that this was some last 
"Harmony Marcam,4804906344179591,28-05-1984
"
     Heavy feet  were  heard in the corridor. Boromir  flung himself against  
"Thedrick Harbard,4808039026200,11-03-1984
"
or I will set this troll's bane in you!' 
""
can move. The  Ring is enough. This extra  weight is killing me. It must go. 
excellently. Looking  in a mirror  he  was  startled to see  a  much thinner  
was lost and no song or legend remembered it. For what purpose they had 
"for a little,  while men bestirred themselves  and  the business of the  day "
"nonsense he had been  saying, and  if  the eagle would  think  it  rude. You ought not "
"shelving ravine, but  they still had a long way to go before they could even "
"Lilah Ballister,4017954699787694,02-06-1991
"
not seen him  in this  mood before. He seemed to have grown in stature while 
""
"Chelsie Boaler,4041370875525313,27-07-1978
"
""
"Sigfrid Gomby,4783480046533971,14-11-1979
"
"Jsandye Oxx,4041379839897,13-03-1977
"
not deceive  you: we know no tales  about hobbits. All that is said among us 
"they  see, nor  hear  any feet upon the paths;  but  there were many voices,  "
are  together  for a day or two at least. I want to hear more about you all. 
"""Up the trees quick!"" cried Gandalf; and they ran to the trees at the edge of the "
reasons that we do not know. Yet I think not.' 
"Alisa Scoles,4514906380388644,12-08-1993
"
his  feet.  Day  had  come at last.  At dawn  the companions  had made  such 
"Link Pasby,4041594499428,23-03-1989
"
"by. Whence they came none knew, but they went up the stony road and "
"Rania Loughead,4041592717456767,10-09-2001
"
"     Even as he spoke, they saw,  as if she  came in answer to their  words,  "
Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in his garden. 
"fair, "
"and west, beyond the land of  the Halflings.  But where  that may be, though "
"fast asleep. They set no  watch; even Frodo feared  no danger yet,  for they "
the stillness of  the  night they  heard the  sound that all along  they had 
"Nolie Greenrde,4041370580920,12-09-1983
"
"Shaun Fentem,4017958696812017,14-04-1986
"
have  come  where  it  is  death to come. The fish of this  pool  are dearly 
reckon eyes are better than your snotty noses.' 
"     A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought, "
"this thing, even as  a  freely given gift. You  are strong and can still  in "
meet him again.' The hobbits turned and  fled deep into the  shadows of  the 
"prentice to old  Holman (him being my dad's cousin), but he had me up at Bag "
Lady  Jowyn came to bid them farewell. She was clad as a Rider and girt with 
possessed  it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring  had 
"the  great ones could  not go, or dared not go. It was an evil  fate. But he "
dismay; for black against the glittering stream they beheld a fleet borne up 
"lay  him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now  a  good while "
"preparing he is now  setting in motion, sooner than he intended.  Wise  fool. "
""
ravens  are  different.  There  used  to  be  great  friendship  between  them  and  the 
"""Here,""  said  Balin,  ""in  the  old  days  we  used  always  to  keep  watchmen,  and "
"Lynette Heckle,4041597587625,12-11-1987
"
"Reinhold Bertelmot,4812346881432303,13-01-2001
"
after. So it proved on this occasion. 
"wide  halls;  but  it was  lighter  and more wholesome  than  any  goblin-dwelling, and "
only two aged hands withering in flame. 
"of course, and they were very tired of it; but cram is much better than nothing-and "
""
sing in the evening.' 
"     'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf,  `not  to mention "
"trees  away  on  the  right.  That  upset  the  spiders  greatly. They  stopped  advancing, "
by  huge hands. It reached the Gate. It  swung. A  deep boom rumbled through 
     and laughs until he chokes. 
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared. 
altogether  happy. One  thing  he  did make  his mind  up  about was  not  to  bother  to 
"sort? Your  land  must  be a realm  of peace  and content,  and  there  must  "
"Carny Sheeran,4041599062450998,02-02-1995
"
"####-     'Now  come!' said Gandalf. `Pray do not interrupt, my good Gluin.  That "
"     'Not since  Weathertop,' said Frodo. The  others looked at him.  'Don't  "
"Judas MacNeilly,4041374481711,13-03-1988
"
"unshaped logs; barns, stables, sheds, and a long low wooden house. "
"you tom-fool  of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in  all  this ruin is "
     Chapter 8   The Stairs of Cirith Ungol   
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening 
under  earth than  any Elf. But neither did  I prove;  and I was held to the 
"it, and why it did not come down to me, the rightful heir."" "
"Nickola Wigginton,4017953338721866,31-10-1989
"
"swell the hosts of  the Dark Tower.  Yea, up  the very roads  that  craft of "
creature dishonours his bones.' 
"them, but could not reach their lofty seats, or drive them from the mountains. "
""
"been  altered, improved by devices,  learned from Dwarves,  or discovered by "
Oakenshield will see it so. I have more knowledge of dwarves  in general than you 
"the door and locked it.  'This should now be given to the Lord  Faramir,' he "
"Miles Maple,4041370504776824,02-07-1986
"
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make off 
riding after nightfall. He needs rest.' 
"not a gaffer could tend his garden  in  what he calls  peace  but  for them, "
"according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim "
"""I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon slain and your treasure delivered. "
"backwards  and  forwards,  slashing  at  spider-threads,  hacking  at  their  legs,  and "
"     'These  are Daeron's Runes,  such as were used  of  old in Moria,' said "
remained there until King Jomer came. 
"Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and  Tom Bombadil, in the Mines of "
"all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring.' "
"an island  in the clouds; and I had  no  chance  of escape, and my days were "
"that fell on the forest,  so that it became  darkened  and its new  name was "
"Caitlin Kupper,4041378126387,20-07-1993
"
names of my companions? Seldom  has any lord of  Rohan received  three  
acres  populous with  the leaves of  woodland hyacinths: already their sleek  
""
others. 
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!' 
"     `And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,' replied  Bilbo. `I guess you mean that "
"     and wings immortal made for him, "
chiefly for their  use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those  were 
come no quicker than you yourself.  
to prepare for one who should replace him. 
"and  poor  old Bombur,  and Balin  and  Fili  and Kili  and  all  the  rest  come  to  a  bad "
stout strides would  bear  them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted  
plain that he had not expected this sudden assault. 
"     Frodo and Sam halted and sat silent in the soft shadows, until they saw "
forth his strength. Slowly the great siege-towers  built in Osgiliath rolled 
path now goes south.' 
"     'Well, no, '  answered Pippin.  'To tell  you the truth, since  you have "
crossed the great  road  from  the Brandywine Bridge; they were  now in  the 
personally to come under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but 
"and a great many  jewels  too. Anyway they grew immensely rich and famous, and "
"Liz Spurett,4041598583300,01-12-1985
"
     'Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought. 
mist before his eyes he was  aware  dimly of Frodo's face  and stubbornly he 
"     `Hullo, Sam!' said Frodo. "
"Here am I, naughty little fly; "
"     Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea! "
is needed. Let us go! ' 
"was  flung up,  shielding his head,  and  across his side there ran an  ugly "
"""Look out for the door,"" bellowed the captain. "
treasures from the mound or from the wall and held them in the light caressing and 
"Eva Vidgeon,4041376211959,16-08-1985
"
"They saw him sooner than he saw them. Yes, they saw him. Whether it was .an "
Erkenbrand;  'and afterwards you  shall take an oath never again to pass the 
said. 'I have  written Gandalf  is  here  in signs  that all  can  read from 
"him up before  he  reached the ground; still he did not want to risk a fall, "
"sprang  forward with a yell, and seized his master's sword in his left hand. "
Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark fortress and to go down and join in 
"the same, and see what you're up to.' "
"     As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the "
"understanding  their  language,  and  used  them  for messengers  to  fly  to  the Men of "
"stepped  into the  light of  the lantern  by the  door that  it was Aragorn, "
"Lyssa Aveyard,4017951615665,24-12-1980
"
"the Brandybucks  of  Brandy Hall,  many  generations of  relatives  lived in "
"Fredelia Keymer,4643639950707414,23-12-1994
"
""
the mountains.  There  are  older and  fouler things  than  Orcs in the deep 
"tied  hands,  and  then  off  they  all  went  at  a  run,  with  a  clink-clink  of  chains,  and "
"Shire, was beyond  living memory: the Battle  of  Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in  "
"seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in it, and it shrank, "
"and  some,  went  off  in  the  direction  of  the  voice.  ""Attercop"" made  them  so  angry "
 
"year,  in  the days of  June, sudden war came  upon us out of Mordor, and we "
road  that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I known what was 
from  u nder the walls came  the  legions of Morgul; and  from  the southward 
fact that it was  my birthday slipped  my memory on that occasion. I was only  
"     `Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been  thinking,' said Sam. 'I'd best  not  leave "
bright and white in the morning. 
"     In Moria, in Khazad-dym. "
that  you  are in the middle of a wood with great  groping trees  all around 
"for  their land  a nd  their works is deeper than the deeps of  the Sea,  and "
"been made for his rescue, and that he knew  of  it beforehand. How that  was "
"elven-princeling in! If it were known that  hobbits had  such hides, all the "
on  Midsummer's  Eve.  Splendid!  They  used  to  go  up  like  great  lilies  and 
"long  as I'm alive, I want 'em. But they're not to cry out, and  they're not "
"     The arm  let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help. "
     `No indeed! '  said Boromir. `Which way shall we take?  Yonder eastward 
little wider  than  a wall. And on  the  other  side the snow suddenly grows 
"trailing,  beards and whiskers of lichen! And  most of the trees seem  to be "
"Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the  "
"roared up to greet  it, and  wreathed about it; and a black smoke swirled in "
when he heard a sudden clear horn-call go up ringing  into the sky. Far over  
at returning them. 
aloft both torches. Before him were the bones of  a  mighty man. He had been 
of  much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat.  Gollum  meant to cheat all  
"By night they had reached  the feet of the westward  slopes, and there  they "
"darkness  of deep night, which lingered still in  cracks and  holes, a  grey "
"clawfingered  - foulbellied  -  bloodthirsty,  morimaite -  sincahonda,  hoom, "
"expeditions  to  the renowned fields of the Marish,  and the  wrath  of  the "
"     `That  what should be shall be,' she answered.  `The love of the  Elves "
"deep  and  deadly  cold.  He  paddled  it  with  large  feet  dangling  over  the  side,  but "
"time I fell,' he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back with  diffi culty. "
     `That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right.  
"we must  risk the peril of  the Road and go. There  are five behind us,  and "
upon them suddenly.  
the garrison of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the fields and about 
excuse you.' 
"Gretel Jerman,4041595733031,28-09-1982
"
"Tamarah Potbury,4969762545574,14-04-1994
"
destroyed. I am not  made for perilous  quests. I wish  I had never seen the 
"were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that  sought "
second hearing. What did you think of it?' 
"go of his line, for he thought he saw  something shining  in  the river -bed; "
"""That shall follow after, as can be arranged,"" said he. "
"The  clouds  were  torn  by  the  wind,  and  a  red  sunset  slashed  the West.  Seeing "
"Julienne Avramow,4041599923998466,13-06-1979
"
him. The others  fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even  Sam felt it. 
"     'Hoom, hm! Ah now,' said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. 'A  dwarf "
would not let  them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the 
heard.' 
"to  wait until  nightfall. After that,  if  Gandalf wanted him urgently,  he "
"Bertie Starkie,4017958183572140,27-05-1983
"
"three other Elves. They were clad  in  shadowy-grey, and could  not  be seen "
"probably saved his life, for Ugl®k's followers leaped over him and  cut down "
"Maddalena Sentance,4489477740671104,04-07-1990
"
"Felice Bartolomivis,4628866886022274,15-06-1979
"
"returned; but  the king's  anger is not less, for  now the horse is wild and "
our counsels would  be  undisturbed. If you do not trust  me  to endure  the 
     Frodo returned his  gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no  further  
"     But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had reached the "
"     Tom clapped his hands and cried:  'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, and "
the mountains of the  South  marched past.  Sleepily he tried  to reckon the 
"the Stairs. And what were you up to? You're  supposed to  keep watch, aren't "
"""—and slipped inside the crack before it closed. I followed down into the main "
End helping  him  to keep folks from trampling and  trapessing  all over the 
     For some  time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with  the  others;  but 
"not to use it, to  use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the "
     'Will I come down?' he mocked. 'Does an unarmed man come down to  
that are  your friends.  Tell them to bring news  of anything that bears  on 
"     'My friend,' said Gandalf,  'you had horses, and deeds of arms, and the "
"to go more often to hear it.  But the Northern Lands had long been desolate,  "
"beside the enchanted  river Esgalduin; and  he named  her Tin®viel,  that is "
"second the  hobbits had a vision, both comical and  alarming, of his  bright "
"to boats,  he has been lying on a  log  and paddling with  hands and feet. I "
for the Lord Aragorn?' 
shield-arm  that is maimed; but the chief evil comes through the  sword-arm.  
"Maddi Rains,4041590023778544,07-05-1988
"
"Earl Nelissen,4692397373481,02-06-1983
"
seen or fell anything like it in the Shire before.' 
"can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle Men, of the "
"warily, creeping on behind, a slinking shadow among the stones.  "
"Lyn Sedge,4041379116007,08-01-1992
"
"do  not wish to go,' he said; `but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of "
"Thelma O'Corhane,4017950732281745,02-12-1976
"
roof of  the house of Eorl. And in two days thence you shall see the  purple 
"Strider.  'We have  now  come to  the  River Hoarwell,  that the Elves  call "
     They rode now at an easy pace and dark came  down upon the plains about 
"delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long  have  its vast mansions lain "
"as I came behind, he burst into new flame. There was none to see, or perhaps "
"flowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank was steep, and "
"Ashlee Grigoryev,4041378610416573,22-05-1992
"
"     'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn. "
crown of their King and his White Tree:  wonderful  tales.  They  built very 
"Berkley Gorner,4041375076531895,26-04-1997
"
"some food.  The clothes will be the  easiest part. As we're in Mordor, we'd, "
"the heir of Kings, and it is to Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas "
"assailing their east -borders, of orc-hosts marching in the Wold of Rohan. "
"mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.' "
Gandalf. 'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?' 
"in,  till  the  running  fire  was  licking  the  fuel  piled  under  the  trees.  Smoke  was  in "
     And with that the host  began to move. But the Rohirrim sang  no  more. 
"hobbit.  Somewhere  behind  the  grey  clouds  the  sun  must  have  gone  down,  for  it "
"whispering,  or  hissing. I  couldn't hear a word  that was said. I did  not "
"rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf's head, it smote "
"whirring  round their ears. They could not stand that, nor the huge bats, black as a "
"He now has Isengard to fear as  well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls,  "
"me that  he  has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and "
"burst  out of the trees and dashed off towards  the voices, if they  had not "
"he knew them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.' "
and passed  through a guarded gate between embattled towers. At its  nearest 
"     Gandalf  now  pressed on  at  a great pace, and the  others followed as "
"Hinze Lunge,4041373589852,20-03-1982
"
     a wind of power in Tarmenel; 
####-you name the Wormtongue?' 
"Casey Luipold,4041376532313,11-07-1979
"
"Margaretha Guillford,4207296944843,24-04-1975
"
Back to lands you once did know! 
cold touch on his heart he thought of Frodo and Sam. 'I am forgetting them!' 
my power. So be comforted. But do not even name this thing again aloud. Once 
"you have leave to  be burned in the house, for the men will need it no more. "
the Wise.) 
"the Shire? "" "
am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.' 
"need no ropes in here,"" said he. ""There is no escape from my magic doors for those "
"sit down. I am not very. hm, bendable. But there.  the  Sun is  going in. Let "
turning to Aragorn with scorn. 'It needs more to make a king than a piece of 
"air grew  hot and  stifling, but  it was  not  foul, and at times they  felt "
yet to have fallen to the ground. 
"time the  line  was  broken,  and after came  the  mounds of the  east-side: "
Orcs may shun the sunlight. there were too many places here where they could 
"Bee Matz,4467711759712045,28-03-1985
"
     Frodo  had no  strength  for such a  battle. He sank  to the ground. `I  
"the City, he spurred headlong back  to the front of the great host, and blew "
"""You may  see  it!""  said  he.  ""It  is  this!""  and  he  drew  forth  the Arkenstone,  and "
 
green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen  in 
"quiver;  and then it began  to grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A "
burden. Where shall I find rest?' 
"it. Then the boat turned towards me, and stayed its pace, and floated slowly "
haze. They were looking across the  Woody End towards  the Brandywine 
"melodious, its very sound  an enchantment.  Those who  listened  unwarily to "
"Frank McVane,4041599953458100,02-12-1985
"
"Juan Keri,4949736270657,14-11-1993
"
and fear.  To do the deed at hand. Every  man that can ride should  be  sent 
"wearisomely heavy, and did not at all like  the idea of trudging for miles and miles "
fairly comfortable refuge.  Night fell and it grew altogether dark under the 
"one from Elrond  –for now June had brought summer, and  the weather was bright "
year the shadows have grown longer.' 
"another among Men. It is a man's part to discern them, as much in the Golden "
"Cherianne Prose,4041371261868,27-11-1977
"
it had under its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest  from the Hedge 
"quicker  than anything could fly, as a rule. But I  don't  enquire how  it's "
a bird was to be seen. 
"some evil  and  lonely  creature.  It  rose and fell, and  ended  on  a high "
"Corabel Braddick,4017957773146,16-08-1996
"
"     `Neither  does Frodo,'  said  Gandalf,  unexpectedly supporting Pippin. "
"from  the  north  under the shadow  of the Thrihyrne, till the  crow-haunted "
"was standing,  gazing northwards into the darkness, thoughtful and silent as "
"and alarmed or offended most  of your relations, and  given the whole  Shire "
"     Suddenly  Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the fire-light "
"'and I beg  your pardon. And I'm mortal  afraid of what Gandalf will say, if "
"'and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot in it "
"####-Hissed at me, he did.  It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was  "
their spears was  like the twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal 
 
     and death's shadow grows  
"Kriste Thunnercliff,4041598694057,29-04-1989
"
"own invention.  When  Hobbi ts  first began  to smoke  is not known,  all the  "
"brought us hither."" "
"over all my clothes, can I? I'll just have to cover up.' "
"the walls of her bower closing in  about her,  a hutch  to trammel some wild  "
####-us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an 
gone to Helm's Deep: the  lands seemed empty  of enemies; yet I  feared that 
"     'Your poor hand!'  he said.  'And I have nothing to  bind it  with,  or "
"below him, wrapped in fume and shadow. As he looked up he would have "
"grown dark  indeed. Jowyn, I would  not have this world end now, or lose  so "
alone. 
"against the stark rock faces, so that they seemed to be drenched with blood. "
"flesh. He ate  the  stale grey  bread hungrily, but  not the  meat.  He  was "
"     `Let us see what Sting may show,' answered Aragorn. "
and keep nassty chips! ' 
"what it  was that he saw, the  light faded; and  now he thought he saw Frodo "
"     'Unfortunately  not,'  said  Pippin.  'But  you  did   not  know  about "
"Dalt Haine,4041374480358,01-04-1990
"
####-and light. It is not unlikely that they invented some of the machines that have since 
who cannot run as light as Elves.' 
"of  them very large, and they shot  a rain of  arrows:  always  at  Boromir. "
and men say that  he is in  this House.  Has any hurt befallen him? And  the 
"     Frodo  woke  at  the sound of Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes. "
down eastward.' 
"managed  to  bring  one  down  on  the  path.  But  when  they  roasted  it,  it  proved "
 
"     'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo. 'I want you to see Rose  and  find out if she "
"about the street. The sun was now  shining warm and bright,  and the  towers "
sentinels of N®menor. So they passed into the dark chasm of the Gates. 
""
"In  the end he would only  take  two  small chests, one  filled with  silver, and  the "
"ought  to  have  followed. We  thought  everybody  had. There was  no  time  to  count, "
"our Company, I think, who really knew him.' "
"Sybille Bruhnsen,4017956055120568,04-11-1981
"
"listen to my counsel, you will not trust the Master of the Lake-men, but rather him "
"He  lifted up  his staff, and  Gimli's axe leaped from his  grasp  and  fell "
"     his arrows shorn of ebony, "
yet been forged again. 
"End garden looking for something; but he had a heavy pack on his back, which "
"without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed,  as  if a chill light had  been "
"####-     Gandalf laughed long and merrily. 'The trees?' he said. 'Nay, I see the "
"pipe-weed or leaf, a variety  probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery "
"and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly "
legend.  The  rotting  piles  of  a  greater  town  could  still  be  seen  along  the  shores 
"     'The trees and the Ents,' said Treebeard. 'I do not understand all that "
holes and dark lightless  places far  from hope. But the Men of  Rhyn and of 
"     A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells "
cannot resist a determined attack for  long. And it  is possible that in the 
"Kurt Piotrkowski,4458684522564,21-04-1977
"
"     Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam, "
but we believed  that it  perished from the world in the  ruin of  his first  
"Salaidh Spillett,4017951100700,25-11-1995
"
and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not  yet 
"faces, deep deep under the dark water. I saw  them: grim faces and evil, and "
downs  drew near. It was still an hour before  noon when they  reached them: 
"     It was. You have  wisely kept that ring secret all these  years, and it "
"rising  towards  the  South the  sun, piercing  the  smokes and haze, burned "
"     The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away. "
as a thief in the night.' 
"When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to "
toward the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they 
"the edge of the camp and killed several Orcs, and then had faded away again. "
if  all had been to their liking. As indeed  it had: no change for the worse 
both ancient and just. 
twilight they longed for home. A  deep  loneliness and sense  of loss was on  
beneath his throat. 
"his own account, he may put any enemy that is about on our track.' "
"side, and with horrible strength, swung them round.  With a shattering  echo "
"Thror  was  referred  to,  Thrain  I,  a  fugitive  from  Moria,  who  first  discovered  the "
stout-hearted would  fling  themselves to the  ground as the  hidden  menace 
"confidently among the many crossing paths, although left  to themselves they "
"mind, and wondering if it were  fit to be  wrought into the  housing  of the "
Denethor relaxed and grew cold again. He shrugged his shoulders.  
hole without trouble. Yet there is little to tell about their stay.  
"After lying and listening for a while, they found they could not resist the desire "
"####-could  look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are "
men it is since the golden hall was built.' 
 
"No more tonight. Sleep, both  of you -- in peace, if you can. Fear not! I do "
mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the  world. Then the 
"to sleep. Very foolish, very dangerous-if poor Smjagol wasn't sneaking about "
 
"were in  her  glance, as  of  one  who has known  many things that the years "
"     Quickly  he returned, bearing a  large and laden  tray.  Then  Tom  and "
between the arms of Silverlode  and Anduin the Great. We  allow no strangers 
""
"entrance  was cut into the bank leading to  the road, and wide steps  and  a  "
"     `None,   Lady,' answered Gimli. `It is  enough for  me  to have seen the "
"on.  At  last  they  pushed  their  chairs  back,  and  Bilbo  made  a  move  to  collect  the "
and more wisdom who keeps some in his house!' cried Gandalf.  
     Such loveliness  in  living  thing  Frodo had  never  seen  before  nor  
"say.  But  Gondor stands,  and even the end  of its strength  is  still very "
Mouthless mutters. 
Elrohir said to him: 
     Et  Edrello  Endorenna  ut®lien.  Sinome  maruvan  ar  Hildinyar  tenn' 
a  cold grey. Red  shafts of light leapt  above  the black walls of the Emyn 
     Gimli  stood  leaning  against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat 
"Stanly Girogetti,4041590452609186,08-01-1990
"
Gandalf only allowed  them a few  hou rs' rest. Legolas and  Gimli  slept and  
came a great red flash. Far beyond the eastern  mountains it leapt into  the 
"your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the  "
more have  grown tree-ish. But  there were never many of us and we have  not 
"     'I am wounded,' he answered, 'wounded; it will never really heal.' "
"Gandalf, and now  Pippin  saw a likeness between  the  two, and he  felt the "
himself in the shadows under the arch. Suddenly  a great horse came striding 
"folded, head pillowed upon stone. But one table near at hand stood broad and "
     Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream:  it seemed that he could  hear 
"hear.  Now  he  is  a marvel, the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech, "
 
"Rohan and may come hereafter.  Halflings  they are,  as you see, yet this is "
"any  rate;  and he stood up,  fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he "
along the west rim of the road many smaller carts hauled by trudging men. 
Dimly they were  aware of  Grishnbkh's great head and hideous  face  between 
wind who will; there are fell voices on the  air; and these stones are aimed 
where King Thjoden had  fallen.  And there they took  counsel together  with 
     At last  they  set off. They led their ponies down the hill;  and  then 
shower  of  yellow  rain; there was a  forest  of silver spears  that sprang 
again a  tiny red gleam far away  flickered upwards on the rim of earth  and 
"Garvey Colgrave,4152445803426563,08-06-1995
"
then rising in swift spirals they  passed away  eastward  vanishing into the 
"and Mr. Baggins. I am sure he has a right to expect it, though I wish he could have "
"first time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no boots, but wore "
"battle for  which it has so long waited. There is  war in  Rohan,  and worse "
summons to the march. This was  the last stage before the battle. It did not 
"""No time now!"" cried the raftman. ""Shove off!"" "
"     Frodo  sat for  a while in thought. 'I have made  up  my mind,' he said "
"was  to be free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on  glancing back  at "
"huge distorted shadow of  himself, a vast and ominous threat halted upon the "
     Gollum  was  tugging  at  Frodo's  cloak  and  hissing  with  fear  and 
"gave back. Scaring  Breeland peasants, and  bullying bewildered hobbits, had "
"distant, and there from a frowning bank  it overlooked the long flats beside "
"followed it. Many thousands then  perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158-60) "
"another day; but Frodo sighed.  His sleep had been uneasy, full of dreams of "
trickling from the terraces further inland. 
that he could muster. Now that the fear of the Dead was removed they came to 
comes  which  I cannot bring. Alas!  for  her  deeds have  set her among  the 
"they heard the howling of  wolves. Their hearts were heavy,  remembering the "
"Brandise McGuiness,4913412420246741,22-10-1996
"
"     'But  if  there  are many of  these  ruffians,'  said  Merry,  'it will "
"army. Bergil was with him, and  he  also was downcast; for his father was to "
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope  behind  the 
""
"     `You're not dreaming at all, Master,'  said  Sam. `It's real. It's  me. "
"####-     'But that is an age and more ago,'  said Sam. 'The Dead can't be really "
"trampling unheeded the grass and  the flowers, we hunted our foes through  a "
"     'Welcome, my lords,  to  Isengard!' he said. 'We  are  the doorwardens. "
"Vin Moorfield,4041376879169,10-10-1991
"
"for the  moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen by "
"Doe Rule,4017954072922,25-08-1996
"
"Othella Allberry,4041590892519,27-08-1978
"
"lead the Company from Moria, and that there was one among you of high "
     But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part  of the very 
heard the gathering sound of  battle. He clenched his  hand. 'I must go ' he 
"     'You ought to go quietly, and you ought to  go soon,' said Gandalf. Two "
"course,  absurd,  but  certainly  there  was  still  something  not  entirely  hobbit-like "
####-beneath  the cover  of his  leather shirt  he clasped  the Ring.  'Down  you  
"chilled, munching wafers of  lembas, in the cold grey of early morning. "
"a  mile away, and a  little below them, for they still stood high up on  the "
####-knew  not what he had spoken; for it seemed that another voice spoke through 
his pack to the assault. 
light through  the trees to the west grew golden; and always they  walked in 
"between  his teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a whistle, and he "
darkness.  `Poor old  Bill!  ' he said in a choking  voice. `Poor   old Bill! 
hoped for. 
"towering walls of Mordor;  and  out of  that darkness the long valley  came, "
ran a hurrying stream:  Frodo could  hear its stony voice coming  up through 
pulled him back. 
"Aubree Humberstone,4041374368647030,26-02-1977
"
"covered in their elven-cloaks, too crushed for the moment, and too afraid to "
"as they  went the  floor  of   the tunnel rose steeply, and with every stride "
authority of the Master  of the  Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck  family 
risk  a  third  visit  when  I  am  no  longer  sure.  Anyway  the  only  way  out  is  down. 
"followed. Then forth from the Gate went  Faramir with H®rin of the Keys, and "
shoulders  needed relieving  of a  swollen head. They might  ask  where  his 
(so Pippin felt) holding  in check a rising  wrath and impatience.  When the 
"Alexandrina Klima,4041591739024,28-03-1976
"
back or throat. 
Now welcome the weary 
"them,  and  they  did  not  mind  the  poor  little  fellow  doing  it  if  he  would;  but  they "
"nothing.  indeed he  hardly  spoke  at all; and  he did not complain, but he "
"     'These are the terms,' said the  Messenger, and smiled as he eyed  them "
"the Steward, and H®rin Warden of the Keys, and other captains of Gondor, and "
"Karon Carrivick,4716826700771798,05-05-1995
"
"     Gandalf laughed.  'Don't be afraid!' he  said. `I  did not bite,  and I "
"Nata Dearell,4041594240095,10-11-1975
"
     he turned his prow; and in the night 
will melt  all the butter in him. I  will roast the  old  fool  over a  slow 
"sound,  he  crept  noiselessly  down,  down,  down  into  the  dark.  He  was  trembling "
"some gazed through the gloom towards the ruined city, and they wondered "
answered; and he repeated it now to himself: 'Except the Sea.' 
cruel rope off Smjagol's leg. He speaks nicely to me.' 
"Paddy McArt,4041375942128959,20-06-1978
"
"     Dazed as he  was with  pain and weariness, Sam woke up, grasped quickly "
"tidings of joy,  for  he would not grudge that I should do so, since he  was "
"understand. It is my   burden,  and no  one  else can bear it. It is too late "
"need  some description nowadays,  since  they have become  rare  and  shy of the Big "
great wind  coming over the leaves of the forest. Then  he knew  that it was 
Lady Arwen. To  his surprise  Frodo saw that Aragorn stood  beside  her; his 
before you send in any report to Lugb®rz. It  won't sound too pretty  to say 
"     'So be it,' said Faramir. "
"     in darkness buried deep, "
Enemy's Ring! ' 
false turn now might be disastrous.  After an hour  he rose up and came over  
"away  it  rose  again  like  a  wall, dark  and drear.  The sun that lay  on "
"     'The king shall come again,' he said.  'Fear not! Not West but East does "
"felt, rather  than saw, a shadow  rise,  one  shadow or  more than one. They "
One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his purpose.' 
"""Who  are  you  and what  do  you want?""  he  asked  gruffly,  standing  in  front  of "
"are  you,""  he  called  in  a  very  loud  voice,  ""that  come  as  if  in  war  to  the  gates  of "
"he had from his dad; and it seems he'd been selling a  lot o' the best leaf,  "
"     They went first  along a black passage, then up  many wet steps, and so "
"from eye to eye, that might suddenly burst into flame. "
"""Hullo there!"" he called with a shaky voice. ""Hullo there! What news?"" "
"     Jomer  went out, and presently  the trumpets rang  in the Hold and were "
"Jordana Aleksich,4298103594588910,03-03-1987
"
"     They looked at him, and for  a  while he was  silent. At last he spoke. "
"of his own  for  the comfort of  the men of  the Lake."" Then Thorin seized a bow of "
"well  as  your  brother  or  better. As  it is, I can only say that I have hurried home as "
"I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't  "
""
     `Here! Here is where the smoke came from! ' it said. `'Twill be nigh at 
"I've been worried ever since. But I was wondering  what these  were made of,  "
"     'But come now,' said the  soft voice. 'Two  at least of  you I know  by "
here! Let it lie!' 
Barad-dyr  that was  reared far  way upon a long spur of the Ashen Mountains 
"burdens, so that they   now marched lighter, and  for a time made good speed; "
"little that remains. Go now, and die in what way seems best to you. And with "
foot and with him one cloaked in grey; and they met before the doors of  the 
 
Faramir 
"daughters  of  the  Old  Took,  head  of  the  hobbits  who  lived  across  The Water,  the "
"ride often  to its shores.  Anduin  is  wide, yet  the orcs  can shoot their "
"Celestine Kubalek,4017954468476,11-02-1993
"
"Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's "
hobbit-girls. 
"     'Well, father,  what can we do  for you?'  said Aragorn, leaping to his "
"Etty Biggans,4041599136058,23-10-1990
"
think.  Time passes.  In the morning  we  must each  go swiftly  on the ways 
the lake and came into the desolate lands. 
     Aragorn  looked and beheld a  bent figure moving slowly. It was not far 
"name of Gollum had not once come up. He was glad, though he felt that it was "
     `Indeed things have changed! ' said Gandalf. `But there is no mistaking 
"seek healing on the threshold of death, and maybe find it no t. Whereas  your  "
hand again.' 
"waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not  step beyond them.' "
road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?' 
"main door of the  Houses, they heard a great cry that went up from the field "
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the 
     `They are coming! ' cried Legolas.  
hurrying  clouds  and  drove  it  off  to  the West  to  scatter  in  tattered  shreds over  the 
"Gayel Paddon,4017958769168,25-06-1993
"
"then sit down and stop wagging!"" "
when you are clad!' 
and then we will consider these demands.' 
like  a  slimy  arm  towards  the  enclosing  hills.  Gimli  strode  forward 
"him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!"" "
"singing, and I could not count or describe the things there were to eat and drink."" "
"where  are  Fili  and  Kili?  Here  they  are,  twelve,  thirteen-and  here's Mr.  Baggins: "
"nor the next day, nor the day after. They had begun to feel that danger was not far "
"Maurise Sweed,4041378767818,12-02-2001
"
with flowers like small white stars had bound  itself across the brows as if 
ever since  they  left  Ithilien now seemed dead.  Slowly and painfully they 
"through Rohan, and Fangorn too, if need be.' "
"additional appendices, or indeed  by the  production  of an accessory volume  "
"     'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,' said Gimli. "
"     That  night  the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn, "
clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall. 
"that  loved  his  folk,  and  already  knew  much  of  what  had  happened.  Very  great "
"Prisca Spenton,4041379815420493,27-10-2001
"
them together. We ought  to think of taking cover somewhere for  the  night. 
     The Shirriff-house at Frogmorton was as bad as the Bridge-house. It had 
done worse trespass than  only  to go  coney-snaring in the uplands: he  has 
they could  descry the long arm of the mountains rising on  their left. They 
today?' asked Pippin. 
"Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business "
"and  spluttered  and  frothed,  and  hissed  out  horrible  curses;  but  they  had  become "
"sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go "
tumbled shoulders of its great base rose for maybe three thousand feet above  
now 
evil: it goes ill with Thjoden.' 
"Shadowfax found the way, and the  other horses followed in his swath. Slowly "
""
knew not  his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be 
"thus  in Gondor now,  though once it was  so, if old tales be  true. But for  "
the ripples of the basin. Presently Frodo was aware of a small dark thing on 
"Fredrika Scrivens,4041379928301093,08-02-1996
"
"     I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best! "
     'But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been  put forward. And as 
"at  flattery, biding its  time, secure  in  its pride and  its  immeasurable "
without effect. His senses were sharper and more aware  of things that could 
the  same  shape  and  season  as  the  day  when  they  were  written.  The  dwarves 
is.' 
"Rollins Halewood,4041373513417638,17-06-1985
"
drink is not for us.' 
now in a high chamber above the Hall of the White Tower  with Pippin  at his 
"suddenly things seemed clear to him, almost as if he had seen them with  his "
"Doll Wathey,4041378347648050,08-01-1981
"
"Trees. But  the Entwives gave their  minds to the  lesser trees, and to  the "
"themselves, burdened as  they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were "
"walked  away, and called  Sam to him.  'I think I  understand  things better "
"Rath Dnnen. And Aragorn planted the new tree in the  court by the  fountain, "
"Darice Tollmache,4041370260943071,16-12-2001
"
"Ransell Djekovic,4017954379710073,24-05-1992
"
dropped head downwards and went out! 
"tonight,' said Butterbur. 'You'll be tired; and there isn't many folk  there "
on and on. 
"Pippin cried aloud, for the Tower  of  Ecthelion, standing high  within  the "
"grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.' "
"     The Black Rider flung back his hood, and behold! he had a kingly crown;  "
 
had a high reputation. 
"""Servant,  indeed!""  snorted  Bilbo;  and  in  the  middle  of  his  snort  he  sneezed "
"Tabbie Dudleston,4017956015242,22-03-1991
"
"know what I  want: but I  have something to do before the end, and  it  lies "
"Boot Heine,4017959061317681,17-02-1996
"
"murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below,  Frodo  fell  asleep with the song of "
you will find on that road. They do not suffer the living to pass.' 
"""There is, if you care to go two hundred miles or so out of your way north, and "
"     'I sat at night by  the waters of Anduin,  in the grey dark  under  the "
"the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it, and go.' "
"back."" "
despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the wolves was  heard 
space in peace  and rest under  the morning high up in the windy  circles of 
Anyone would think that time did not count in there! ' 
"going to strike the bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry. 'Let  the guide go first  "
it may be useful.' 
"themselves,  and made  songs  about days that would never come again.  Never "
I fear. And so we fly  -- not  from  danger but  into  greater danger.  Every 
"was turning upside  down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but "
know whither we are going?' 
"the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to think that the "
finger. With yells of delight the goblins rushed upon him. 
 
amused. 'Why not?' 
went forward quicker than they had done on their first march. 
"dance,  early  and  late,  with  the  elves  of  the  valley.  Yet  even  that  place  could  not "
"and battlements, tall as  hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above "
"I  did not hinder  it,  for  generous deed should  not  be  checked  by cold "
"moment  it withdrew  them,  and  brought  up new forces, massing  them about "
     The Road goes ever on and on  
"Annabel Smalles,4041599895430,02-08-1978
"
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring  would  gain a power  
"""Stay! Your wish is granted!"" said a voice. The old man with the casket threw "
white  horse.  The pony  was laden instead with a great part  of the others' 
"gates. The  trees, swung by  strong  arms, smote the timbers  with a rending "
"Gregory Sinclair,4041374403100763,12-02-1980
"
     At last  they were brought to a  halt.  The ridge took  a  sharper bend 
"of  the  king,  and had  been sent  with important messages  from Thjoden to "
of  the  river  to  prevent  anyone  coming  in  or  out  that way. But  the  portcullis was 
"     'I am troubled, for the  first time  since I have known  him. We should "
"Langsdon Vicarey,4114908298329052,02-09-1992
"
"see more in the  dark  than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And "
anything!' 
"and war-hardened and asked for no quarter. And so in this place and that, by "
"####-other name your Gaffer gave you,' said Frodo. `Climb up and untie it and let  "
     'Hallo there!' called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped short.  
"mattress  of  straw  and  woollen  blankets.  He  snuggled  into  them  very  gladly, "
"and he gave it to his servant to be his steed. Down, down it came, and then, "
"####-thoughtfully. 'But they would like your country, so I just wondered.' "
Merry saying. 'Can't go another step  without rest. Must have nap. It's cool 
"danger,  though  to  himself he  thought  only that  he wished  to see  more "
"Annis Stoffersen,4041592758635,30-04-1988
"
"anxiety. Frodo seemed to be weary, weary to the point of exhaustion. He said "
"Drucie Houliston,4041599624434,09-06-1987
"
like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he  knew. But it looked 
""
found elsewhere in the Shire. 
"If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.' "
feel the honour more  deeply. But  what is the good  of such honour?  Indeed 
"cold through  the long nights. But glory  and trumpets!'  he cried,  turning "
"gazed in wonder, first at the  wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come "
Durin's Day! ' 
white flakes of snow settling on his sleeve. 
"Bag End. 'Good-bye!' said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He "
"fire, and  threw  it whizzing down among  the circle of  the wolves.  It  struck one on "
"will have a job to come down here quietly."" "
"look at the outlandish  folk that visit him:  dwarves  coming at night,  and "
"drawing  nigh, less now to me is  that darkness than my own darkness. It has "
"     Otho would  have been Bilbo's heir, but for  the  adoption of Frodo. He "
     Chapter 2   The Riders of Rohan   
his stead  - if you command it.' 
""
"they had changed their opinion of Mr. Baggins very much, and had begun to have "
memory of the face that he saw at the riding from Dunharrow: the face of one 
     beheld afar beyond the seas. 
"for a while, and came out of them suddenly and too late. "
"     Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard's side, so eager was he to come to "
"country, but it is not mine to reveal to any  outside the Company. Yet those "
rattling in the chill  easterly wind. Aragorn moved  slowly away. He came to  
used  by  patrols  or  by  messengers going  swiftly  to  lesser  posts  and 
"     'Pippin,' said Frodo, 'didn't you say  that Gandalf was less close than "
"     Our journey done, our errand sped. "
was introduced to him.' 
"Shermie Gomm,4041595881426,15-02-1997
"
"Luce Hurndall,4041371755492038,08-11-1978
"
"the  east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands  to "
said by our lore-masters that they  have from of  old  this affinity with us 
forward.  But  his  hope soon  changed  to bewilderment and alarm. The  dark 
many  mortal  kings.  From  that  treasure  Bard  sent  much  gold  to  the  Master  of 
"than  beautiful,  broad,  bright-eyed,  red-cheeked,  with  mouths   apt  to "
"himself. But all went well, and they met no guards. As a matter of fact there was a "
"     His  sword,  Sting, Bilbo hu ng  over his  fireplace,  and  his coat  of "
the beginnings of  chapters I and III of Book Five; and there as the beacons 
"     The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and  man, they were "
     'Greatly  changed he seemed to  me since I saw him first  in the king's 
     Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No 
would be a lonely journey. 
"just  keep  it  in  its  pocketses.  It  doesn't  know,  and  it  can't  go  far.  It's  lost  itself, the "
"greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland. "
dragon-shapes vomited from  the tormented earth .  In such an hour of  labour 
 
"     'But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,' said Aragorn. "
"that  went  soft in the  gloom, until he  suffered himself  to  be  led, and "
"of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.' "
     Frodo  then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edges 
"old  songs  loudest,  were  now  heard  as  loudly  crying  that  the  dwarves  had  stirred "
"Gusti Aherne,4041596579585969,31-10-1986
"
"dragon  was  dead,  and  the  goblins  overthrown,  and  their  hearts  looked  forward "
"ascent seemed  agelong,  a  meaningless journey in a hateful dream, going on "
aside! Mymak! Mymak!' 
"Lenci Bates,4017952229388462,21-12-1997
"
"now  be going forward  into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but "
when he felt his eyes closing and knew that his struggle to keep awake could 
     `And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? ' said Galadriel turning 
their  light. There were piles of refuse everywhere. The door  was  scarred; 
"     They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End, "
every pot and pan he possessed seemed to have been used. The washing-up was so 
the East and his  return: an adventure  which later involved all the Hobbits 
"their  use,  and  lurking  there,  listening  to  the  talk of  the king's  servants, he  learned "
"Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not "
"     'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that's hard! ' said Sam shivering. `That's hard, trying "
companion. Suspicion fell on him at once. 
""
"Rohirrim who  were unhorsed but themselves warworthy, and he himself  "
"####-The  dark  filled  all  the  room,  and  the  fire  died  down,  and  the  shadows  were "
     At  these  words  all fell  into silent thought. They  heard  the  wind 
found again. He  knows where Isildur fell. He knows  where  Gollum found his 
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly. 
"after my master, as you'll understand,  and not meaning any harm to  Boromir "
"Cristina Stuttman,4017954666272480,19-01-2000
"
"     Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you've got "
deeds  have been done here; but let now  all enmity that lies between you be 
"eye  under  his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to song, and he would "
so;  and  he gave him  also three books of lore that he had made  at various 
"     'You  speak  for  me, Gimli,' laughed Legolas.  'Though I would  sooner  "
"birds, they look like spies of evil."" "
towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the  
"you,  if  the white horse could  not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, "
"the  steps  above  the  old  bridge,  and  unloading  them  there  had  bidden  them  return "
direction of the forest and the mountains. Mauh®r had apparently arrived and 
"more.  His last memo was of Boromir  leaning against a tree, plucking out an "
"hour. Then Gandalf came back to us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He "
"Dale. They  are  good  folk,  the Bardings. The  grandson of Bard the Bowman "
"crown  of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last  "
"his hand, and then turned and (following Bilbo, if  he had known it) hurried "
"never  thought  that  the  dwarves  would  actually  dare  to  approach  Smaug,  but "
"yet one of the fallen heroes; but I suppose there is still time enough for that!"" "
     Nothing more was heard for several  minutes; but then there came out of 
"might have  been  some grumbling about 'dealing locally', but that very week "
"otherwise,  using the authority of the Steward, I  have today brought hither "
"and the doings of  the Shire-folk, or listening in turn to tales of the Mark "
     `Now for the  last race! ' said Gandalf. 'If the sun is shining outside 
'ProudFEET!' 
prisoners.' 
hold  him firm; but also deep  down in him lived still unconquered his plain 
"some folk killed, killed dead! If you'll believe me.' "
""
"They were prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop. "
down the passage. 
"glad that the beastly Orcs  look like being destroyed, but I would rather be "
"Bethanne Folliott,4041594862434979,03-09-1978
"
"Kings of Men to Middle-earth out  of the  deeps of  the Sea, borne  upon the "
"Leupold Jerzak,4041597623417548,25-02-1979
"
been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir. 
"     Bilbo  flushed, and there  was an angry light in  his eyes.  His kindly "
straight  for  the  hollow  by  the  left  breast  where  the  foreleg  was  flung  wide.  In  it 
####-the North wildly blowing. Rohan had come at last. 
"and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode  "
"flat, and  in many places green  with wide plains of grass. On this side  of "
thing in? ' 
"disgust came over it, and a hint of his old malice. `Smjagol smells it! ' he "
"and  wary  enough to  detect  its  presence. I  much prefer history, true or  "
     Frodo did not answer. 
"towards  the Isenmouthe  twenty miles away. It was not a broad road, and  it  "
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there 
"     Thjoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked "
"the  middle, called Orthanc. Saruman has  a tower  on  it. There  is a gate, "
     'Who to? Not to your precious Shagrat. He won't be captain any more.' 
""
"had  no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away,  they  called a  "
"Fields, where  there were  great beds  of  iris  and  flowering reeds. There "
"Kiah Phippin,4041379943897,09-08-1980
"
"to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North. "
dangerous  search  on  the  western  slopes  for  the  secret  door.  They  moved  their 
"Oswell Farryann,4041372745107918,12-11-1978
"
"trees, bare and  silent,  stood, rank on  rank, with tangled bough and hoary "
"like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?' "
"come swiftly to us!"" "
"even wearier,' said Legolas. 'There will  be no  escape again, if we  do not "
They  turned and passed under  the low forbidding  arch. At  once they found 
"Iolanthe Robez,4041596615416831,03-12-1975
"
""
muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!' 
"Corsairs of Umbar  are  coming!  So  Belfalas is  taken, and the  Ethir, and "
""
swiftly.' 
"started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down "
     Trees crack as I pass. 
"still the  stench of Shelob lingered,  and  then  on  and up, until he stood "
"little while he stopped suddenly and sniffed the  air doubtfully, hissing as "
"Karly Spry,4041370221129,12-10-1977
"
perhaps more  that I  cannot see. Your  hands and  your wits will  be needed 
"this burial. They  have now followed your marshal,  Elfhelm. I sent him with "
"evil to die in battle, even  in bitter pain. Were I permitted,  in this dark "
     As sun upon the golden boughs 
"     'We must get under cover,' said  Pippin, 'or we  shall be seen. It will "
"Gollum's mind had jumped to a guess quicker than his; naturally, for Gollum had "
and  fast asleep he  remained  in  spite of all  they could do. They were  still  standing 
""
"barrel,  for  there was  no  room  to  spare, not  even  for  a hobbit, between  its  top  and "
again with women  and fair children  that returned to their homes laden with 
"force into his domain; and folly  to throw away.' He  paused suddenly, as if "
"between us. But  before you go,  I have brought in  my ship gifts  which the "
really  he  would  have  liked  a  loaf  and  butter  better  than  bits  of  meat  toasted  on 
"Gandalf, and then shuffled quickly past behind Saruman. As the wretched pair "
"Xylia Fortun,4017959308543784,05-10-1988
"
"observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Jomer and the king. "
name and the pass-word the guard saluted  him and let  him pass through; and 
Mordor the Sun  was climbing over the eastern  rim of Middle-earth; but here 
"the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge  of Rivendell, if once the "
"Lonni Copas,4041374953859,01-05-1999
"
"passed  down  the  years,  until  it  is  brought  hither  by so  strange  a  "
     'You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?' 
     The Rider leaped from  his horse. Giving his spear to another  who rode 
"another  journey  down  into  the Mountain. He  did  not  like  it  of  course,  but  it was "
"horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream. Most like a spider she was, but "
and  got up. Frodo also seemed to have felt  the  call. He struggled to  his 
"mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had  left his old home for good. "
great surprise.  And there  was a note in the voices of these newcomers that 
"twisting round and round Orthanc, until it looked like a tall peak of cloud, "
"     They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and  came to a stout "
with  their ropes. Down  the same way  they were able occasionally  to  lower one of 
So Gollum hissed: 
""
     Frodo took rather  more time to follow him. He had the  rope  about his 
"     'I don't think so,' said  Sam. `Don't see  why it  should, if you don't "
"stretching  away  across  the  unseen  floors,  lay  countless  piles  of  precious  things, "
""
at dusk.' 
     At last Gandalf looked  up. 'It seems to be a record of the fortunes of 
"World:  Elves, Dwarves, and  Men. Legolas  shall be for the Elves; and Gimli "
edged with  large white-washed stones. In a hundred yards  or so  it brought  
"were the ones from the  North. They had drawn  their knives and swords,  but "
     The messengers without bow or answer turned and fled. 
long. Vi ctory now vanished from hope. They had only stemmed the first onslaught 
"Florinda Blanking,4041374933547,30-10-1995
"
glad and lighter of heart. His burden was less heavy on him. Gollum welcomed 
"tools. Even in ancient days they  were, as a rule, shy of 'the Big Folk', as "
     And that proved well for you -- for now I shall no longer 
"Frazer Geake,4041374136463,13-09-1983
"
"dared  now,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  grim-voiced man  (Bard was his name), who "
trade  that  came  and  went  on  the  waterways  and  the  growth  of  the  traffic  on  the 
not speak until they were behind closed  doors. Then  at  last  Pippin  took  
"to  sniff? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held. You stink, and "
"Leupold Clemenza,4041592751391300,20-11-1996
"
""
"troop of Orcs  going north toward Moria, along  the skirts of the mountains,  "
was  my wont; and  little of what you have half said  or left unsaid  is now 
"overhear  him and spring on  him. `Smjagol will stay here: I will stay here, "
sinister a reputation in hobbit -legend as the Forest itself.  
down into the country. 
deep into the heart of the hill; but at one point where it  passed under the caves the 
Shadowfax his horse shining like  silver.  The  riders  passed  over to  the 
"Clementina Jeratt,4041593150956,25-10-1975
"
long hairy arm took each of them by the neck and drew  them close  together. 
"mist. But there was an evil feeling in the air, as if things might indeed be "
"height; and  he comes  now  from the storming of Isengard,  of which we bear "
"from home, and  his body  was cunningly hidden. But  Smjagol returned alone; "
"sit  on the  edge  of  ruin and talk,  as Gandalf  says,  while  he  is busy "
     'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo. 
rumblings. Saruman  had  best  not be caught  away  from  home  when the dam 
"Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to  the Enemy, but it escaped.  I had "
"     Nothing assailed  the  company  nor  withstood  their passage,  and yet "
"bridge, and behind him all the host stood still. There was  a pause, a  dead "
"twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up aga in, up "
"     'You did  indeed!' said Gandalf,  laughing suddenly; and  he  came  and "
"Sauncho Withur,4041593716794489,20-02-1999
"
"the dark  arch of the tunnel, fearing to see eyes, or some  shape beyond his "
"Sascha Dunks,4041376746638268,07-12-1983
"
"     All that day the  Company marched on, until  they felt the cool evening "
"     'I was in  the company  that  held the  bridge, until it was cast  down "
"been in Isengard,  but I have journeyed  in this  land, and I know  well the "
 
feeding up before he could look the part of Mayor; so Frodo agreed to act as 
but turned his keen eyes  on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away. 
knocking  off  a  few  more  heads.  Then suddenly  the answering  cries  of 
unless  I  am  mistaken.  There  is  an  unpleasant  time  just  in  front  of  you;  but  keep 
"knife,  which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo "
our part.' 
"Barbee Brammer,4009586397240798,24-04-1987
"
"the shade as the sun moved, until  at last the shadow of the western  rim of "
"horrible. All about the streets and lanes behind the Gate  it tumbled  down, "
It is  high time for lunch.' He sat down on the bank at the side of the road 
"places.  It  was  high  summer,  and  on  this  eastern  side  of  the  mountains  there  had "
him.  He  shrank  against the cliff. But  they marched  up  like  a  phantom 
"Trudy Bytheway,4041594395808,04-08-1979
"
"Jada Ellsbury,4017956280721255,24-11-2000
"
their kind together. 
     In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea! 
"Trent Ends,4041373680658790,18-09-1998
"
and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he 
"     'Well,  my little  ones!' said Grishnbkh  in a soft whisper.  'Enjoying "
wasn't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with 
home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I  have  been watching 
"looked down upon the  three hobbits, that had been  laid on their backs upon "
     Of mighty kings in Nargothrond 
mind.  I'll  wake master up.' Gently he smoothed the hair back  fr om Frodo's 
"grass-lands  rolled against  the  hills  that clustered  at their feet,  and "
"Gris Davitashvili,4017955373866381,30-04-1983
"
"Matthus Chanson,4041370407660,24-11-1975
"
"Georgetta Feakins,4041592059491877,30-10-1983
"
beside 
"Days, which had then been taking shape for some years. I desired to do  this "
"Orcrist.  All  of  a  sudden  you  gave  one  of  your  blinding  flashes,  and  we  saw  the "
turned left and took quietly to  the  fields again. They went in single file 
he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a  
"Alfredo Rubartelli,4041379266837286,15-10-1999
"
"pained  him, as if he remembered some old torture.  But I am afraid there is "
"more, if I am spared, I shall equal the Old Took. I should like to beat him; "
"     'You lie,'  said Wormtongue.  'And  this sword your master himself gave "
to follow the  orc-road. For at long intervals on that highway  cisterns had 
They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held 
Sauron himself stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set  
"thinking that the Enemy was asleep, who was only banished not destroyed. "
"they  seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during "
"Slender they looked, but strong,  silken  to the touch, grey of hue like the "
     The travellers  now  turned their faces  to  the journey;  the  sun was 
"####-sign, and seemed hardly to breathe. "
"before  the  fire  in  his  favourite  sitting-room  in  his  hobbit-hole,  and  of  the  kettle "
"Kikelia Baddeley,4192532462182,28-01-1984
"
     `Some there are among us  who sing that  the Shadow  will draw back and 
cliff  and  runs into  a wide  shallow trough at the bottom of a  long  hard 
"clang  of sword on iron  cap, the  dull beat of blade on  shield;  men  were "
"that moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark "
"Teodoor Haseman,4017950121244,10-05-1981
"
"things must end,' he said, 'but I would have you wait a little while longer: "
"northmost  foothills  of Ered  Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But "
"     'Now I understand a part of last night's  riddle,' said Legolas  as  he "
     He cocks an ear at all the jests 
"daily wear and tear, as you  might say. The Gaffer, he says: ""Make it short, "
"Something is outside!"" "
Bridge there was a great  spiked gate;  and on the further side of the river  
"fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?' "
Good-bye!' Treebeard turned and left them. 
"     'We have  come to a dead end, Sam,'  said Frodo. 'If we go on, we shall "
"I am only too ready to consider all your claims carefully, and deduct what is right "
"black  darkness  loomed beyond,  and  in  it glinted, here and  there, cold, "
laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench  
"into the dark  woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming "
"could  blow  a horn or something and go galloping to his rescue.  He sat up, "
"Stacie Leiden,4041377613398259,27-10-1997
"
"     'Yes, Slinker  and Stinker, as I've said before,'  said  Sam.  'But the "
"we never found him,  and  at last  I  despaired. And  then  in my despair  I "
     Even  as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls  passed from  looming grey to 
"     'You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,' said Gimli. 'But you speak "
     They drew up the  last  boat  and carried  it to  the trees.  They laid 
"     `Of course  it is,' answered  Sam.  'But not alone. I'm  coming too, or  "
shone like fire  on the red metal of their  new and greedy swords. There was 
     The vision now  changed. Brief and  small but  very vivid  he  caught a  
"     `Then sit down,' said Frodo, `and don't move!' "
to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.' 
all.  So  he  sat  down  and  wished  in  vain  for  a  wash  and  a  brush.  He  did  not  get 
"edge  of very great troubles, and I  am only glad to hear that  you have not "
"     Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.  "
"the  Stewardship, although it was only for a little while, and his duty  was "
"     Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits  of bark; and made "
"Maddalena Recher,4041378173009146,20-02-1980
"
"was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside, "
"would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.' "
"stood upon the walls; and she was clad all in white, and gleamed in the sun. "
     'The  realm of  Sauron is ended!'  said  Gandalf.  'The Ring-bearer has 
rough wall along its edge warned them that they were drawing near to another  
"shouted, swinging his axe. 'Since Gandalf's head is now sacred, let us  find  "
"not  do  to  leave  a  live  dragon  out  of  your  calculations,  if  you  live  near  him. "
     The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and  
"Dawna Waldron,4017957083900468,19-08-1982
"
"     'You come back,' shouted the soldier, 'or I'll report you!' "
     And so the  fifth day came since the Lady Jowyn went  first to Faramir; 
reminded suddenly  of their ever -present peril. He  stumbled on a ring still 
"burial was then but beginning; and Thjoden mourned for the loss of Hbma, his "
 
"time so  blessed,  I missed Bilbo;  and  I was  grieved when  among all  the "
"if you lay near, with my arm round you, no one could come pawing you "
"Noah Benz,4041591305914534,19-02-1984
"
"the shoulder with  a  laugh,  and taking  candles  led them  back  to  their "
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their fire the snow lay 
"flickering in  his  bulging  eyes.  `Masster, masster!'  he hissed. 'Wicked!  "
"to the slaves of Mordor; and in his hand was Sting, and its  light smote the "
in the  Enemy's eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter  of 
over Water. My Jolly here will show you.' 
"Harlond,""  he  said.  ""Yet to  the  Harlond we must  come tomorrow  or  fail  "
     In western lands beneath the Sun  
He will starve. Poor thin Smjagol! ' 
"Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would "
"     `Now let us cry: ""a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!""' said Aragorn. "
"Gretna Ortler,4041373508782616,02-05-2001
"
"     'Then I am needed  there more than here,' said Gandalf, and rode off at "
only a few miles southwards from their start. 
more do I urge you now to go on without rest.' 
"Ring!' he  cried. `If ever  such a  tale was told  in the South, it  has long "
"stones  some  of  which  were  small,  and  others  were  half  covered  with  moss  or "
""
prisoners. 
shrouded the River: they  could hear it  rushing  and foaming over the sharp 
"send  for  our  smiths,  and  reward  even  the  least  skilful most  richly.  Fathers would "
     1.  
"the lands about, either the hills  that they  had left or the mountains that "
throbbed again. Yet  to no heart in all the host came any fear that the Wild 
"stirring,  and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode  across and looked  "
"Lyman Jon,4041599290309743,21-08-1986
"
went  silently. At last Haldir  led them down the  southward  slopes  of the 
"welcomed guests kindly in the better days, but in  these  times the unbidden "
took him while they  held their own boat back with their paddles. He floated 
""
About four days from the enchanted stream they  came to a part where most of 
"     For  DORA BAGGINS in  memory  of  a LONG correspondence, with love "
Fall Moon! Dark be the land! 
they were related to. 
"""What were you doing in the forest?"" "
"     Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'Come  inside!' he shouted,  and  putting out "
""
"Gerda Meldon,4041592394514,04-01-1995
"
just  round  the  last  corner.  The  blink  of  red  torches  could  be  seen  behind  them  in 
found  a passage between  two  hills that  led them into  a  valley  running 
"through the  Ettenmoors, and down from the north . It took me nearly fourteen "
think they've taken anything but our swords.' 
"on the previous day. At  the entrance to  the court he turned  to the right, "
the writing on the arch: that seems certain.' 
from  the  doors  of  the  hall  like  fire  through  all  the  town.  People  were  shouting 
do. But to hope? I do not know.' 
war. Helm for Thjoden King!' 
"paused, and only the beating of hands and feet was heard. "
heaped plates and dishes.  
""
"to  save the Shire, and it has been saved, but not  for me. It must often be "
""
"     'Against the Shadow in the  East,' said  Strider  quietly.  'Not  much, "
valley. The noise of bubbling  waters  came up  from the foaming  river -bed. 
"     'What is the news, Aragorn?' he said. "
"Trude Chiechio,4017951777882157,05-10-1988
"
"     `You should fear the many eyes  of the servants of Sauron,' he said. 'I  "
"also they  forgot  whatever languages  they had used before,  and spoke ever  "
"     `Tell me,  Legolas, why  did I  come on this Quest?  Little did I  know "
"centre of  the an is thus to be found in  the old inn of  Bree, The Prancing "
"about  the  creature, whether  he was  quite  alone, whether  he was  fierce  or  hungry, "
"learned much,' he answered. 'But I am not  going to give an account of all my "
can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved  I 
packs against the bank and their  legs out  into the road. After a rest they 
"rams  made  of  forest  oaks  and  swung  by  giants.  The  rock  boomed,  the  walls "
"wild could scarcely have seen the hobbits, hooded, in their grey cloaks, nor  "
"     Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight! "
Tricksy! False!' He spat and stretched out his long arms with white snapping 
lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the 
     'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here  I 
Frodo. Come and take what you can get of them!' 
     Slowly Gollum  raised his eyes and  looked  unwillingly into Faramir's.  
course west of the Mountains  for many  miles and days. The country was 
"that was foretold for you, Elessar, the Elfstone of the house of Elendil! ' "
"     'They set a  watch on the tower,   I believe,  but  the watchers were so "
I've never heard of a  better land than this. It's like being at home and on 
"     'Climb back, I suppose,' said Frodo. "
"     And I must follow, if I can, "
"Klarika Semeradova,4930540867458,13-07-1994
"
"tale, of course, and goes on past the happiness and into grief and beyond it "
Out of the  darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout rode back and reported  
"####-yellow,  russet under  the sun, beyond which lay hidden the  valley  of  the "
"####-across a wide  lake  of darkness dotted  with  tiny fires, there was a great "
     And now all those lands lie under the wave. 
"northward  landing  lies. If it  still  remains,  we  must  have  passed  it "
dragon-in  which  he  was  much  mistaken-and  he  would  have  given  most  of  his 
"not, so mighty a man as he wa s, and only orcs to withstand him?' "
"more, with  all these new rules. Most of them  are in it against their will, "
"Later  there was  a  great  rumble  of  thunder away south, and  flashes  of "
"     And not  only Sam and Frodo  here, said  Gimli, but you too, Pippin.  I "
"lowest, for a steep slope went up from where he stood; but  he  guessed that "
"arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider "
"was, he was dragged out and down into the water, to  the bottom. Then he let "
their little  gardens that used to run down bright to the water's  edge were 
"in white with a great mantle of blue and silver over all, and the long sword "
"     'Yes,  we must go, and go  now,' said Gandalf. 'I fear that I must take "
"     So foot by foot, like small grey insects, they crept up the sl ope. They "
"hold Helm's Gate, and more had since escaped thither. "
of  such a high  degree that it  must imply a fair measure of  blindness. Of 
"very Crack of Doom, stood Frodo,  black against the glare, tense, erect, but "
like a fly in a spider's treacherous web! Yet  even  the most subtle spiders 
"Caro Metzing,4017951421912632,28-09-1999
"
"seen  him  before  somewhere, and suddenly  he remembered  the  P®kel-men "
     Sam stared  at him suspiciously: he  seemed frightened or excited.  `Go 
Master  Ferny's: just a  way of increasing his profits  from the affair. The 
hesitated to attack Ugl®k. 
"the North? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time, unless they be "
     I've a mind to dine on thee now.' 
"treacherous  attack, the  horror of Shelob, and his  own adventures with the "
wizard st ood looking at the fire; then he stooped and  removed  the ring  to 
no boat could have been carried  over the stony hills from  Tol Brandir; and 
Company have  failed again. They have not  found the Ring. Neither have they 
 
"face  grew hard. 'Why  not?'  he  cried. 'And what business is it of  yours, "
 
     Suddenly  he seized them. The strength in  his  long arms and shoulders 
"too. To  tell you the truth,  I had been watching you  rather  closely  ever  "
"####-Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311, when the white wolves "
Eastfarthing Troop now. There's hundreds of Shirriffs all told and they want  
"in other guise. You  I have  not seen before,  for you are young, but I have "
"Bebe Leipoldt,4017954509832,17-08-1995
"
"alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind  us,  bulwark  of "
according to the ancient laws. 
"In places deep, where dark things sleep, "
"the  beautiful  hobbit-hole  built  by  his  father,  which  I  have  just described  for you, "
"and shapeless, and some had  been cruelly hewn, yet  many had  features that "
""
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should 
every corner of his prison. 
"of all changes  for  the worst."" ""Changes for the  worst,"" he repeated  many "
"his thoughts  had been carried away  from the dark  Mines, to  Rivendell, to "
or in Rivendell. It  would  be mad and cruel to let Frodo go  to Mordor. Why  
     And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest.' 
"     'He is not yet sure,' said Gandalf, 'and  he has not built up his power "
"that time the Ring might aid him, if he were sudden. "
     So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defence of the City  of 
to find something (or so Thorin said to the young dwarves). You certainly usually 
"Nana Chimenti,4832437583703,12-08-1993
"
     In their shed they found the ponies;  sturdy  little beasts of the kind 
"been laid bare, but very few others.' "
"a long broken slope that leaned up towards the mountains. Presently, not far  "
     Horse and horseman; hoofbeats afar 
"mountains,  and  slowly  circling  ever  round  and  round  they  came  down,  down, "
"     'No, I am  afraid  not,' said Merry. 'We have  not found any, not  even "
"Jayme Marousek,4017950892851,25-09-1977
"
drawing h is hand across his mouth. 
of the Eye cut in rude strokes on their bark. 
"fountain of mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth. "
wave upon a hill of  sand. The  defence  was  swept away. Some of the Riders 
     Up came Tom with his big boots on. 
"in  my  own  home,  where  folk  are  more  reasonable.  But  I  have  an  interest  in  this "
"     `I do  not blame you,'  said Faramir. 'You spoke  with skill  in  a hard "
"brown  hair  was  crowned  with  autumn leaves.  He laughed,  and   going  to "
"Yet, maybe,  he would  not  have done  so,  and  the journey of Boromir  was "
"     Frodo sat  for a while and shivered, dreadful fears chasing one another "
"there;  and  yet now they were silent,  and no footsteps rang  on their wide "
"returned again. One entrance only was there made in  it, a great arch delved "
Gaffer was recognized as the  leading authority  by all in the neighbourhood 
"more, they too may walk again. But  come!  We will not speak of such  things "
"bay, and  then they saw that several tall stone jars stood there, with heavy "
"     I stump round and round, "
"     'So I see,' said Sam. 'No time for washing, but time for wall-propping. "
"""And  then  I  couldn't  think  of  any  other  question with  him  sitting  beside me,"" "
"went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had "
"Remington Kubu,4986730765696,31-08-1984
"
"tracks lead away.  If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be  carried "
"The  others  laughed.  ""You  were  quite  right,""  they  said,  ""the  meat's  alive  and "
"gave a belt of gold; and to  Merry  and Pippin  she gave small silver belts, "
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who is related 
"order for Sam Gamgee, as  you might say. But they've done all the killing of "
"wish  to speak  to us, come down! Bring out your  king!  We are the fighting "
"     'Well, you're wanted  anyhow,' said the leader. 'We want you.  Take him "
     `How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! '  said Frodo.  
     Enchantment healed his weary feet 
branch fell from an  old overhanging tree with  a crash into  the  path. The 
"distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes ran  down into dim "
the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The  line  of  the River grew 
     In many-pillared halls of stone 
####-chair. Upon it sat a man so bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but 
"homeward  journey.  And then, by fortune, I  came suddenly on what I sought: "
"Trina Prydden,4041597820265,22-10-1999
"
"And®ril rose and fell,  gleaming with white fire. A shout went  up from wall "
slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost before she was 
He  stopped  and  listened.  It  did  not  sound  like  goblins;  so  he  crept  forward 
"     Frodo  thought  for  a  moment.  'Well,  Sam,  what  about  elanor, the "
"well.  If  not,  come  back  if  you  can!  It  you  can't,  hoot  twice  like  a  barn-owl and "
"####-dark, swiftly growing. Now Sam too bowed his head, hoping that it  would hide "
"River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest "
""
"Terror seized him. He  shrank  back,  and for a moment he stood trembling in "
indeed nigh!' 
Suddenly  Bilbo's  arm  went  towards  it  drawn  by  it  enchantment.  His  small 
"again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did "
"Earvin Pinchback,4017951705857727,15-10-1995
"
"desperation,  now returned. As  far  as he  could  see, there  was only  one "
"rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the tops of forest -trees, there "
     Light was fading when  he  woke.  Frodo sat  propped  against  the rock  
itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was 
failed and there was no time for thought. 
be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes 
"of Beren or of T®rin wield it. She yielded to the stroke, and then heaved up "
""
"     `And what makes the smell, I  wonder,'  said Sam. `It's like  -- well, I "
####-it won't be dangerous any  more. There  is a real king now and he  will soon 
goes. There's  sometimes  fifty of them  in their sheds up Hobbiton way; but 
     Pippin  felt  curiously attracted by  the  well. While the  others were 
"us forgive  him!  For the Quest  is achieved, and now all is over. I am glad "
"pressure)  by Bilbo  to Gandalf,  is  now  given  according  to  the Red Book,  in  place "
"there faced the riders, the  grim black wall  of the Dwimorberg, the Haunted "
"     Legolas stirred in his boa t. `Nay, time does  not tarry ever,' he said; "
free.  He  beat  the  creature  off  with  his  hands-it  was  trying  to  poison  him  to  keep 
"There is no need to tell you much of his adventures that night, for now we are "
     'Gandalf!' he  cried. 'Gandalf!  He always  turns  up  when things  are 
"companions scrambled in  this bony land, climbing to the  crest of the first  "
and 
Rock gained  only a  brief respite. The  assault on the gates was redoubled. 
"living things gave up their struggle; the tops of the Morgai were grassless,  "
"     Then turning again to  Frodo, he spoke in a quiet voice  once more. 'To "
"on the brow, and called her softly, saying: "
is close to the Road.' 
"task. Yet I  could wish, were it of any avail, that the One  Ring had  never "
"     'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider. "
"shapes. some squat and broad, some  tall and grim, with high helms and sable "
"Shelob cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered  as she  tried "
"Corny Gaiter,4041592665715,17-11-1996
"
"already  you have come  too late, only to see the last days of my house. Not "
""
"end up, ""that gold was only an afterthought with  us. We came over hill and under "
"together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us "
"     'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,' said Gandalf. 'We will "
     'No! I have provided  it: all that you will get till noon. Food  is now 
with  their  scattered  relations  in  the hills  and mountains) were  descended from the 
silver 
"rid of the miserable voice  for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now. "
"fire.""  He expected no  less, and when he saw  my face he fell down flat and "
of Elfstone and Evenstar with whom your life has been woven!' 
"     'I  know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way ' said "
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream. 
"and charged  again; and each time, like  the incoming sea, they  halted at a  "
when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her Mirror! ' 
"The years had gnawed it, and violent hands had maimed it. Its head was gone, "
"glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished. "
"Bilbo could not see him, but he was wondering a lot about Bilbo, for he could see "
or two in this cloudy weather. He's beginning to give quite a light.' 
"eyes of their  own accord, but  eyes will blink, if  the  feet stumble. Lead "
houses  built of wood and many dark doors they passed.  Beside the  way in  a 
"####-     'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,' said Aragorn. "
longer.  At any moment now he knew that the end would come: his master 
"sparkle  of man  colours  at  the  surface,  reflected  and  splintered  from  the wavering "
"command  the Warden. If  you will stay in this  house in our care, lady, and "
     Tall ships and tall kings 
"what  surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his "
""
the small  camping kettle at a little fall  where the water fell  a few feet 
"was  hard, as if  wrought by elf-wrights out of steel. Or  was  it, maybe, a  "
"suddenly, and  choosing  a place where the ba nks  were  lower, he waded  the "
"     The Guards of the gate  were robed  in black, and  their helms  were of "
Gandalf came and endured long speech with him.' 
"""Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it, we hates it, we hates it for ever!"" "
"     Then Merry  took  the  horn, for it could not be refused, and he kissed "
"came in  from  Whitfurrows  last  night with a ""secret message"", and another  "
were those places and so  deep  the horror that lay on them that some of the 
stacked. 
"you were rescued.  The  Lady Galadriel's gifts: your glass,  Frodo, and your "
flat. After he has come so far and all! ' 
"spring,  and  a  fair  one  with  mild  weathers  and  a  bright  sun,  before  Bilbo  and "
"gold buttons), Bilbo also noticed that Balm's beard was several inches longer, and "
"Daniele Burdis,4041377665028275,19-11-1978
"
####-was  swiftly  ebbing.  They  had  reached  a low ashen  hill  piled  at  the 
"Sean Mairs,4017959211426,30-03-2000
"
 * BOOK III *  
 
"""Be-sides, we saw them coming along behind us in the distance."" "
     Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst  of  all his cares when Sam 
Out of  the north from the  Black Gate  through  Cirith  Gorgor there flowed 
pool; and there  they had their first really  painful shock. This  was Frodo 
"The  flies began  to torment them, and the air was full  of  clouds of  tiny "
"way again."" "
"Sargent Sparrowhawk,4017951928522,06-08-1991
"
Chapter 9. The Last Debate 
"eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the failing "
near.' 
"for  a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in an  angle  of the great "
"tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength. "
"With  the willing help of Fili  and Kili, Thorin  and Bilbo  at  last discovered  the "
out. Maybe its soft clinging  hands and toes were finding crevices and holds 
should  have  lived  yet  long  ages  merrily  in  the  wood.  And  as  the  valley  widened 
"do  you think you've  been kept alive  for? My dear  little  fellows, please "
"     'The Lord of the Mark rides  to Helm's Gate,' Jomer answered. 'I, Jomer  "
"and Frodo, and he was shivering. "
"killing  dragons  like  Smaug,  and  he  strongly  suspected  attempted  burglary  or "
""
patches and slashes of grass-green and moss-green showing where water might be. 
"None could pass the  Teeth of  Mordor and not feel  their bite, unless  they "
"twice,' said Pippin;  'only a little while ago  he slipped away as you  drew "
"beat down all resistance,  break the last defences, and cover  all the lands "
"think, he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of Rohan  will go down to "
"Lotho, turned  up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said  Lobelia, "
"Susette Scarth,4017956926281,07-08-1990
"
"still lived on  in the waking world. Evil had been  seen  and  heard  there, "
Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting  of the 
""
     'Where  is Faramir?'  cried  Beregond in dismay.  'Say not  that he has 
"The  men  of  the  lake-town  Esgaroth  were  mostly  indoors,  for  the  breeze  was "
"""I  don't  believe  it  is  tied,""  said Bilbo,  ""though of  course  I  can't be  sure  in  this "
"northward, asking: 'Where are the Riders of Rohan?' "
"     'Then if you  will have it so, lady,' he  said: 'you do  not go, because "
thought of that before! We've got  -- you've got some  of  the light of it in 
"     Gandalf  looked curiously  and closely at him.  'No,  it does not  seem "
"""Why what has happened?"" cried the dwarves. ""Do get on with your tale!"" "
"     Then she fell on her knees, saying: 'I beg thee!' "
in a tower in Minas Tirith and  write it  all down. Otherwise he will forget 
"once, so now he had told Bilbo that both he and Elrond had been well aware of the "
     Like thunder they broke  upon the enemy on either flank of the retreat; 
food and drink were needed to cure the guests  of shock and annoyance. 'He's 
Bridge held against us.' 
"included in our Company; now is the time for him to earn his Reward."" "
all of fair silver with a baldric of green; and wrights had engraven upon it 
"     Secondly,  to  celebrate my birthday.  Cheers again.  / should say: OUR "
"clad  in  mail, and still his harness lay there  whole; for the cavern's air "
"     'She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo's "
his  errand was one that you did not wish to fail? It  has. And now he shall 
"Herminia Grimsdell,4041591799929,12-04-1990
"
####-not Boromir? The Ring would give  me power of Command. How I would 
"like  that  carrocks,  and  this  one  is  the Carrock  because  it  is  the  only  one  near  his "
carefully. He was  on  a  stony  path winding  downwards with  a  rocky wall.  on  the 
"Work, work! Nor dare to shirk, "
     They looked  back.  Dark yawned  the  archway  of  the Gates  under the 
"     Cormacolindor, a laita tbrienna! "
"     `Gollum,' answered Frodo. 'Or at least, so I guess.' "
and I cast you from the order and from the Council.' 
     The host turned away now from  the  road to the  Fords of Isen and bent 
"Consalve Lakin,4041595287194,26-07-1982
"
flame; and he saw that though the sky behind was now dark. still the  window 
taken you away to the Dark Tower . ' 
"shall have to decide  what to do. However, deciding what to do does not take "
"ever said about keys or barrels while  the dwarves stayed in Lake-town, and Bilbo "
"his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseback. He  wore no "
from Cair Andros have  already reached us. The isle has fallen. Another army 
seat and himself rushed at Thorin with his mouth open. 
"were  of linked golden leaves, about his waist. Boromir!  I cried.  Where is "
"rose and blew, and  their hair, raven  and golden, streamed out  mingling in "
 
"     Very stealthily  Gollum led them down the hillside, keeping under cover  "
get  out of  his chair  and  dance about.  He  told them tales of  bees  and 
"Norean Bucknall,4041591655402,29-11-1989
"
####-course. Strider seemed to  be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out 
"Glynnis Toye,4017959307623231,05-06-1987
"
win so far.' 
"Pelargir on Anduin. 'Four days and nights, and on into a fifth, we rode from "
"Then he had questions of his own to ask, for if Gandalf had explained it all by "
     Sam gasped and gathered  all his  remaining breath  to shout. 'Look out 
"     `We promises, yes I promise!' said Gollum. 'I  will serve the  master of "
"before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees stood there, one "
"on the  slope nearby, two  or  three  hundred  strong.  They sat in  a  wide "
"host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain "
"Kimberlee Nevison,4041594535023,24-05-1980
"
"of how he had ""won"" it, and I  could not believe it. When I at last  got the "
"Tarra Hutable,4041372706972581,01-04-1987
"
"them;  he laughed again. 'Why, Sam,' he said, 'to hear you somehow makes  me "
"     'They mustn't  be silly,' he hissed. `We must go. No time to lose!' And "
remembered  feeling  before. He was  thinking  once  again  of  his  comfortable  chair 
     `I could not follow him then and  there. I had ridden  very far already 
"for  hats  and  coats - the hobbit was  fond of visitors. The  tunnel wound on  and on, "
them 
crown of  this  bitter road. Against the sullen redness of the eastern sky a  
"pans,  the smaller fitting into  the  larger; inside them  a wooden spoon, a  "
"the shore, but Thjoden  could  not  be overtaken.  Fey  he  seemed,  or  the "
"####-     'Please, Treebeard,' he said,  'could I  ask  you  something?  Why  did "
"Mamie McClaughlin,4041594694846,08-01-1999
"
events since Frodo and he  had left  the  Cross-roads. He  wondered what the 
had not followed him. 'Sam!' he  called.  'Pippin!  Merry! Come  along!  Why 
"the danger, they would  not dare to go. But they wou ld  still wish to go, or  "
"     `I never thought no such thing,' answered Sam, in no mood for jest. 'If "
"Smjagol will get food there too, perhaps. He's very hungry, yes, gollum! ' He "
"     'Yes, I  have brought your two treasures.  They  were found on Sam when "
     They went out into the hall.  Bilbo chose  his favourite stick from the 
the cracking stones. But still it could  be seen  that once long ago a great 
'Not now! Not until the morning!' 
"rough  platform  of  an  eagle's  eyrie.  There  he  lay  without  speaking,  and  his "
"Betteanne Tiery,4017958074281520,27-10-1983
"
"and while it remains  they wi ll endure. Many Elves and many mighty Men,  "
Glorfindel and  Strider followed  as  rear -guard.  They were only  half  way 
     At  last the glad day ended; and  when  the Sun  was gone and the  round 
"     'Look!' cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them. 'There "
"     And  as  if in  answer there  came from far away  another note.  Horns,  "
""
"Griffith Goodbourn,4017950296414989,31-01-1997
"
"they've showed so far,' said Cotton. 'But I dare say they've got other gear, "
began  to go west. After  a brief halt  and a hasty meal they went on again. 
of all he scanned Thjoden's face and opened his mouth  as if  to speak. Then  
"her  song and greeted them. `We have come to bid you our last farewell,' she "
"     And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out "
"happens. If we come  to  Isengard,  it won't  be the  great  Grishnbkh  that "
round him.  `You  sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket.  I'll walk up and 
"wished  to  go  and  see  the  great  mountains,  and  hear  the  pine-trees  and  the "
""
"lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages come "
"I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the  other rabble: the "
back quite safe.' 
"had an errand there, that he dared not hinder.' Tom  nodded as if sleep  was "
"     'The Ents made up  their minds rather quickly, after all, didn't they?' "
"Persis Endley,4412202745411260,21-02-1978
"
"Maggi Monni,4017955046292015,30-12-1982
"
part of the Story goes on. 
"don't we get together and charge through? What's old Ugl®k think he's doing, "
     `And what would you swear? ' asked Frodo. 
"Huberto Tambling,4041592023733,20-06-1981
"
Easterlings  and the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by numbers that we  were 
"North-kingdom when the D®nedain were young,  and chief among  their foes "
"     'If only I could have my wish, my one wish,' he sighed, `to go back and "
"crown, and yet making still a pillar of wide girth. "
with Peregrin's  foolish  stone; but  probably something  has been disturbed 
"back up the  stairs. `Wrong again, I expect,' he sighed. `But it's my job to "
"south to tributary lands, from which the soldiers of the Tower  brought long  "
that he turned and strode from the hall with Pippin running at his side. 
of Healing.' 
"the pursuers could  not be told, but they seemed  no fewer than  the  king's "
"Drud Avison,4041376641262,18-05-1977
"
     It was  Gandalf that  brought the  first  tidings.  With  a  handful of 
justice to the truth.' 
"leaf-bladed, damasked  in go ld and red;  and searching further he found also "
"Indeed for stone they took him, for he moved not, and he said no word, until "
     Chapter 8  Fog on the Barrow-Downs  
unless those that behold the visions turn aside  from their path to  prevent 
"thoughts were  a mixture  of  surprise  at  being  saved  from  the  fire,  and  fear  lest  he "
"cannot  say  more,  nor see what kind of folk they  may  be. They  are  many "
of  the  land  and  of  the  trees  were  as  well  known  to  him  as  his  hands  and  toes. 
and  he  passes unseen. Light  is his footfall!  Never  before had  any  man 
"many are half  awake. Some  are quite wide awake, and a  few are,  well, ah,  "
"stay up  there and be netted!"" For he saw spiders swarming up all  the neighboring "
"against you, and his  servants  had turned aside from all  other errands and "
"sent to bear tidings not burdens."" "
"     `  ""So you have come, Gandalf,"" he said to me gravely; but in  his eyes "
     The  travellers  turned their backs on the road and  went downhill.  As 
and ruffians in the Shire itself - to rescue Lotho Pimple!' 
"You hear the Woses, the Wild Men of the Woods: thus they talk together  from "
"     'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,' said "
"hints  and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew  that  danger lay  ahead,  of "
"     `There  lies  the fastness of  Southern  Mirkwood,' said Haldir. `It is "
"     On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just  make  out a  "
"and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious "
"sister, was touched by any  frost, until  she first looked on you.  Care and "
breath.  They were  standing  in an  open  space. To the  left stood a great 
"""The  goblins,""  Beorn  had  said,  ""will  not  dare  to  cross  the  Great  River  for  a "
     The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at  the same instant there was 
"     'Yes,'  said Frodo, `it was Strider that saved  us. Yet I was afraid of "
"can’t  think  what  anybody  sees  in  them,»  said  our  Mr.  Baggins,  and  stuck  one "
used  end  at  the  eastern  edge  of  the  forest;  only  the  river offered any  longer a safe 
####-Splash the wine on every door! 
"not know, and our hearts are heavy,' he  said. 'But as  for the Paths of the "
"hobbit  to  find  out where  they  were, was  some  time  before  he  could  get  anything "
"not tell you all this before, because  it is only by  musing on all that has "
"together, and part not in this world again!' "
cunning  masonry  that looked north-east  and   south-east. About the  lowest  
murmur of no more than two or three voices. And seen  closer in the light of 
"faster  than  ever,  and  as  poor Bilbo  could  not  possibly  go  half  as  fast-for dwarves "
"thought  of  Bilbo  and his long friendship with the  dwarf,  and of Balin's "
"     the day's end, or the day begun. "
occasionally between the trees. 
"####-no  keys,  but Bilbo was  trotting  as  fast  as  he  could  along  the  passage  towards  the "
"followed was dim; for here as the Mountain drew near the air was ever mirky, "
"spear-shaft, and it broke. But  even as the orc flung down the truncheon and  "
whisperings  and groanings and an  endless  rustling sigh;  the  earth shook 
"     'O!  Hm! You need not  trouble about that,' said Treebeard. 'I can give "
"Josee Brimmacombe,4041375132188029,28-03-1993
"
of Gondor that he may name.' 
"hour of  the  day, I heard  the blowing of that horn: from the northward  it "
your forked tongue behind  your  teeth.  I  have not passed through fire and 
"shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they "
better  soon. I feel  better already. Wait! You can't do anything  without a  
"thought. 'This in brief is how  I  see things at the moment, if you wish  to "
boats defeated the malice of the archers of Mordor. 
For  the  Lord of  the  Galadhrim is  accounted the wisest of  the Elves  of 
"of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then  they went to bed.  Frodo's party "
some devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all  orders  the  cruelty of  the 
"behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond's son. "
"####-be glad? Beyond hope the Captain  of  our foes has been  destroyed,  and you "
     Sam  sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he  were  counting on  his 
stragglers  that  had  followed  them  got  tired  and  turned  back at  the 
the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called 
"Ronny McComish,4041370508400,30-07-1986
"
"was  open,  letting  in  a  warm  spring  breeze.  Bilbo  began  to  whistle  loudly  and  to "
"""Kill'em, I say,"" hissed a fourth; ""kill 'em now and hang 'em dead for a while."" "
"     'I am  out of my reckoning,' he said to Frodo.  'I did not know that we "
would  almost  have  welcomed  sounds  from  below  of  the  dragon's  return.  In  the 
"her long  world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor  "
"     For ANGELICA'S use, from Uncle Bilbo, on a round convex mirror. She "
"Ignaz Bayfield,4398603631429,11-03-2001
"
"Marley Callender,4041597888962345,13-10-1991
"
"     'There's no time for tales till we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo,' said "
"     A cold  wind flowed down behind them, as they turned their backs on the "
"Kathryn MacGiany,4041598171775352,25-02-1984
"
"of a lamp, black night fell. "
Gandalf 
     'And  that  is near the end  of our tale.  For  during  that evening and 
"Benny Bristo,4041379315915422,07-07-1994
"
Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all  in ruin. It is 
"stood the wolves at a respectful distance, watching and waiting. "
""
"a  while he grew a  little calmer, and Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if  a  "
"him. This  is a story of how a Baggins had an adventure,  found himself doing and "
"     'The  perishing is more  likely, and will be a lot  easier  anyway,' he "
of blue flame springing up from the tower and from the encircling hills into 
it did not  seem quite  so heavy as he  had  expected. 'Only some  bundle of 
"all, I may say. And I don't really see why I should. Why do you want me to?' "
damage. Suddenly up came fires and foul fumes: the vents and shafts all over 
"down  and  would  do  nothing.  Fili  and  Kili,  however,  who  were  young  (for "
in 
art of Gandalf improved with age. 
"stead when he went away to war. And  that was King Edrnur, last  of the line "
"were, of its end and passing away  before its beginning and middle had  been "
"They dreaded  to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider "
Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazvd ai-mknu!' 
no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel -making. I  saw Mr. Bilbo when he came 
"complete,  and  they were  all  invisible,  ring  or  no  ring.  In  fact  so  black was  it  that "
and round the mountain-sides. 
wizard sharply.  'But  I expected to  find  it.  I have come back  from dark 
Where the forest wide and dim 
"broken; she stumbled to her knees. He bent  over  her like  a cloud, and his "
"Adelbert Paylor,4041373974594149,03-08-1984
"
this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes  on. He won't cross 
     'You won't have to. I've--'; but just then  a savage kick warned Pippin 
"on by a false guess of our Enemy's weakness than to  do us much hurt,  yet.' "
Now  we  will  return  to  Bilbo  and  the  dwarves.  All  night  one  of  them  had 
"     'Past supper -time  now,' said Pippin; 'though I daresay  I could  bring "
"he  was  good  to  eat,  and  whether  Gollum  was  really  hungry.  Riddles were  all  he "
Chapter 5. The Window on the West 
"over to the other side. Really gone over, I mean; not just obeying ruffians' "
their journey. After  a while Sam turned and looked back at the way they had 
"where the exiles from Edoras  were housed, women and children  and old  men. "
"Osborn Cregin,4041592052827408,14-01-1986
"
conquered. Few  have gained such a  victory. Be at peace! Minas Tirith shall  
in  the  sight  of many. And many indeed saw  them  and the light that shone 
glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring. We must go down to face a  
again. Then in the  willow-meads  of  Tasarinan we may meet in  the  Spring. 
"     'Well,  you  must  choose between orders and the life of Faramir,' said "
     and the Dark Tower is thrown down. 
"Wood-elves' realm. I speak to the Master of the town of the Men of the lake, not to "
"     And there he dozed and dreamed of ale, "
"Ilysa Mitchelhill,4017953256003156,05-10-1998
"
"     Then suddenly Merry felt  it at  last, beyond doubt: a change. Wind was "
"any  voice. Gandalf took  no turns, right or left, for the passage seemed to "
"     'First  we must tend the fallen,'  said Legolas. 'We  cannot  leave him "
"the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, u ntil they came "
"We  thought  of  going  East,  as  quiet  and  careful  as  we  could,  as  far  as  the  Long "
"Rosanna Rosencrantz,4041377371472528,10-09-1999
"
"Anthia Litchmore,4017952644698,20-01-1980
"
"him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about his 'precious';  "
began lording it around and taking what they wanted. 
a little house  at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all  but 
"three  companions  went round  into  his garden,  and trotted  down the long  "
"historical,  dubious,  and  mythical,  and  the  various  sorts  of  stabs  and  jabs  and "
"Sinclair Eagle,4041370953065232,01-09-1975
"
"that road came soon to the black Dimholt under Dwimorberg, and the menace "
 
"year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth. "
there 
"places, all  the  same,  where he had to trust wholly to it: smooth surfaces "
     and harps of gold they brought to him. 
"     'It is all that  I have to spare,  for there is  much else to heed,' he "
"Then  he tried other spells.  one  after another,  speaking  now faster  and "
do not  tire. And later we  may have  to  search for our  path  in hard bare 
"things!' He knelt by  Pippin's body: the hobbit was lying on his back rigid, "
"terrible  to  see,  and  the  commotion  they  made  filled  all  the  forest.  Wolves  are  "
"####-approached swords were  unsheathed, and  spears  were  shaken, and horns and "
 
"leaving them, and like  this without  any explanation. But surely  they will "
"times Sam's mind  was filled with the memories of food, and the  longing for "
"towards  the  forest,  day  by  day  they  toiled  in  parties  searching  for  paths  up  the "
""
"me  to do so,'  he  said. 'But for the present I am but the  Captain  of the "
you mean to do  about it. But it's a pity that folk as talk  about  fighting 
any 
"     'No,' said Merry. 'I can't. Not yet, at any rate. But at least, Pippin, "
"Laureen Zeale,4041379266877,20-10-1985
"
they could stop till they starved. Let them try to get to land and he would be ready. 
"Beregond;  'but tell  me quickly, if you may:  what goes forward? Whither has "
"to fetch  wood and  oil.  And I have told Beregond, but I'm afraid  he won't  "
like a floured  dumpling. But there were several questions asked  that  made 
a  blow. Nobody  left alive!  Whose had  been that  horrible  dying  shriek? 
hoarded in the dark within. 
the  Mountain.  From  Lake-town  the  barrels  were  brought  up  the  Forest  River. 
ways of escape  into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some 
"     'Take the hilt,' said Gandalf,  'and speak after the Lord, if  you  are "
"able to scramble out, wet  as a  water -rat.  Frodo  took off  the  Ring  and "
"Vanya Inchboard,4213590766361,24-05-1979
"
"famisshed we are. precious,' he  said. `What is it they eats? Have they nice "
"back over their shoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow.  "
on the lands changed slowly: the trees  thinned and  then failed altogether. 
"on their backs, and their faces looked deathly pale;  and they were  clad in "
"But  that's all your  fault,  Snaga. You and the  other scouts ought to have "
"not lead us well,' said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.  "
     Boromir stood  silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in 
"nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he must take "
""
     With green scarves the  two guards  now bound up the hobbits'  eyes and 
roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each 
"mile  out into  the  plain it clustered like some huge nest of insects, with "
"you will find both toil and great fear, and maybe worse.' "
"     PPPS.  I hope  Butterbur  sends  this promptly.  A  worthy man, but his "
"trophies, hanging above hearths or on  walls, or gathered into the museum at "
in the East; and he thought of the long fingers of that Shadow: of  the orcs 
"others?"" "
hidden  trees were sighing  softly. He lifted  his  head.  Then he heard  it 
"Helen-elizabeth Worsall,4317492657378,17-07-1986
"
"Mattie Lashmar,4041598669448,03-06-1980
"
"     Gimli the  dwarf alone wore  openly  a short shirt of steel-rings,  for  "
carpets of the forest. 
and  all the mists had rolled away;  wide lands lay bleak about them in  the 
"ruin, vast wings outspread,  crumpled on the  earth; and with  its fall  the "
"and  the  strong  place  of  his  treasure,  and  the  fortress  of  his  people  against  their "
he was of the race of Dale. 
     When they  had walked for about three hours they rested. The night  was 
"Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been betrayed: "
Then at  night fresh   forces  came  over  the river  against  our camp.  All 
"Arda Eland,4017957591586379,03-02-1997
"
dimly on the battlement. 
splayed against  the cliff. But  he was far out of the  reach of any helping 
"Bethena Riddington,4103301604342,12-06-1976
"
"     Then Faramir came and sought her, and once more they stood on the walls "
"aid. War  is  kindled.  See,  there is the  fire  on Amon  Don, and flame on "
     It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed  off  first. 
"     When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain -air, "
your family that I was promised. Thorin? Take it that I have disposed of my share 
it.' 
"sing!"" It was not the last time that he wished that! "
green with woods  and  all  the  sheltered  valley  rich  and  pleasant  in  the  days when 
savage blow at Merry who stood in his way.  He fell dead with four arrows in 
"Odetta Kleuer,4041378811244,03-06-1983
"
why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!' 
"fall  his mace. Her  shield was  shivered  in  many pieces, and her  arm was "
forward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace  of the trees. He 
"     Sam  went  red  to  the  ears  and muttered something inaudible, as  he "
some  of  the thicker  and warmer things  that they had  brought against the 
"     'Good  night to  you,' said Nob, and went off to take  his part in  the "
there came  a high shrill cry that echoed  in the towering walls before him. 
"Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere you came there, Merry, that we "
"Libby Bonass,4017952829265,02-09-1992
"
     Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a  moment he wondered 
"forward. 'Come, stand before me, Ceorl!'  he said. 'I am here. The last host  "
"we've found a better place than this. There's  something of everything here, "
"night,  when  storms  come  up  from  East  and  West  and  make  war.  The  lightning "
"make  a  feint  of  resistance,  and many  there  fell  before  the  rest  drew  back  and fled "
had no food since the morning. One of  his guards had a whip. But at present 
someone was  singing a song; a deep glad voice  was  singing  carelessly and 
I  fear you will not  be for the Third  Company. Still we may  hope  to meet 
"fierce and red, when the hobbits  set out  again on the most dangerous stage "
fat bellies. Some in the wearing of the years had lost all features save the 
"interminably. Suddenly Sam heard a hiss behind him, and  there was Gollum "
"said Boromir, who came up at that moment. `And doughty Men too, if I may "
"doubt give you a welcome at The Pony, and there you'll hear all there is  to "
"     Merry saw many folk standing, looking up and muttering: all their faces "
 
"hurts us, and we've done nothing.' "
"####-sloping path. He  jumped over  a low place in the hedge  at the bottom,  and  "
"fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.  "
"them, to  his  horror, he  could distinguish the harsh voices of  Orcs. Then "
Bolger opened it . A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and 
""
"     'I do not  think your law was  made  for such a chance,' said  Aragorn. "
"The horsemen,  following  the trail, had  turned  from the  river,   and were "
"some matters govern  yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing,  "
"for the king under a great tree. A large lantern, covered above, was hanging "
"and food  and  bed are  sweet.  To  take them into exile,  where  hunger and "
     And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin  
This is what he promised to do for them. He would provide ponies for each of 
"began to crawl, claw by claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind. "
down the ravine that they had  climbed and seek for a way  along the valley. 
"     I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair. "
here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever  
"West Wind  still blew, but down on the stones behind the fences of the Black "
"     `Here,' said Elrond,  turning  to Gandalf, `is Boromir, a man  from the "
"Dorette MacInherney,4041376889433329,17-02-1977
"
"hesitating,  and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told  him; "
     I'll try my teeth on thee now.  
"     This is  what it is, Mr. Baggins, said  the leader  of the Shirriffs, a  "
fifty  years  they  usually  got  these  sort  of  jobs  (when  everybody  could  see  that  it 
water on the neck's like  rain  on a wilted lettuce.  There! Now  I can keep 
"neck, and the hobbits  caught  a glimpse of two small pale gleaming  lights,  "
"the  ring  his 'birthday  present', many times.  That also  Gandalf  thought "
"there are seldom any clouds, and the men are  fierce and have dark faces. We "
"unless it is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to. "
"steam. Ice fell like  rain. I threw down my enemy, and he fell from the high "
"to strike  the East Road in a day's journey, and avoid the  Barrows. He told "
"     The  morning was  bright and clear about them, and birds were  singing, "
"     Then the light of  his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: `Would that "
the Dimholt.  There under the  gloom of  black  trees  that not even Legolas 
"Bilbo  had  all  he  could  do  to  keep  up with  the  torches,  for  the  elves were making "
"yards across, with  a low parapet. There the  stair was covered by  a  small "
"trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here  and there an elm tree or  an "
great ramparts right up to the precipice that overhung its western end;  and 
"dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for  particular persons; and "
 
wondered what he could mean. Won't you tell us some more?' 
"Belfalas, where folk are hardy a nd numerous. All the more do our thoughts go "
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.' 
"a spinney behind  the house, and then  cut across several fields. The leaves "
"Sea, or to destroy it.' "
""
     above all shadows rides the Sun 
"grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and a "
"voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water. "
"####-     'Nay,'  said  Beregond, 'this is no weather of the world. This  is some "
"""Can any of you throw a rope?"" "
"     ` ""Many  leagues,"" said he,  ""but not to  the ends of the earth.  I was "
"     'But if you would know what I think set  the beacons ablaze, it was the "
""
pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that eating was a  necessary part 
and over the levels beside  the roads horsemen could be seen  riding in many  
"make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I "
 
they turned  away from the paved road  and took  a path that went off into a  
as the Orcs were accustomed to use. He looked at them closely. 
yesterday night. We might labour far upstream and yet miss it in the  fog. I 
noise.  He  had  had  it  described  to  him  often  enough  in  tales.  One  of  his  elder 
into Anurien. The Rohirrim cannot come.' 
birthday  was  drawing  near:  fifty  was a number   that he felt was somehow 
some I can  show  what  they desire  to see. But the  Mirror will  also show 
not get rid of it? Why not be free of your  doubt and  fear? You can lay the 
"Riders can use men and other creatures as  spies, as we found at Bree.  They "
and scattered by the Rohirrim they had  broken and fled with little fighting 
women of the Rohirrim come to war in our need?' 
"rose, and now his friends could see his face: it was pale and drawn, and his "
"wade  and  swim,  and  then  miles  back  again  to  pick  up  the  tracks  again.  By  that "
"have passed us by, if Aragorn had not forbidden them. "
"and no one spoke to him, indeed none seemed to heed him. He brushed away "
"     'Not  a beggar,' said Aragorn. 'Say a captain  of the Rangers, who  are "
"then with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen! he thrust the end of his "
"Read La Grange,4017958214421,04-01-1989
"
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.' 
"untimely brood, apt to evil. And the Dark  Lord took it, and nursed it  with "
had 
"place, and wisely,  it seemed to me. But I learned or  guessed more from you  "
and all my speed may be?' 
"Minas Tirith. Few went to rest, for small hope had any now that even Faramir "
"Bombur,  which  they  had  to  carry  along  with  them  as  best  they  could,  taking  the "
and the first adventure is briefly recalled. 
have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your west is an edge where 
came up out of the shadows. 
"Dalila MacClay,4792510367400,26-02-1979
"
grey stone did not stir. 
the window gone; the ruined stair was choked with burned and broken stone. I 
Long straight cracks appeared and widened. A door five feet high and three broad 
"the  winter store,  wrinkled but  sound and sweet;  and a leather flagon  of "
great hands to all the company and went off into the trees.  
"Elysia Mayfield,4041593295968231,21-10-1977
"
"Fayina Slemmonds,4041599994068,07-09-1976
"
     'But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?' 
"at  nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet  I think that "
     With a squeal Gollum let go. Then  Sam  waded in; not waiting to change  
""
"white stars opened in the East,  but the West was still  golden  and the air "
"Ailey Jindacek,4017953589378036,02-04-1999
"
started  other  pieces  below  them  slithering  and  rolling;  then  lumps  of  rocks  were 
"     The  king  turned to Merry. 'I am going  to  war,  Master Meriadoc,' he "
ears are made of wood. It is to be  hoped that the Orcs will be content with 
"     O'er stony mountains cold and grey, "
"""Cross  it  is,  impatient,  precious,""  hissed  Gollum.  ""But  it  must  wait,  yes  it "
"     `But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,' objected  Boromir. `And even if "
"     `Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,' said Frodo. "
had no time or  did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is 
"Felicdad Hovenden,4017953023778379,21-12-1977
"
"Clark Tilbrook,4017958748346626,04-04-1996
"
"knows. We will promise Master, if he saves us. We'll promise to It, yes.' He "
"with a  puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as  if he was not sure that "
"     `Smjagol promised,' said the first thought. "
are handed down. But there are hollow dales in this land where the  Darkness 
he found himself at the doors of  the great hall beneath the gleaming tower; 
tried.' 
"Boromir had played in all their adventures. with the  wolves of the wild, in "
"seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin, "
     FEAR! FIRE! FOES! 
even in the morning of the Shire. 
"uplifted, between  the advancing dwarves and  the  ranks awaiting  them. ""Halt!"" he "
many have escaped hither to the Rock.' 
"dwarves, who were scrambling up now as far as ever they dared to go. "
"had  thought of starting  the feast while  the others were away, but Mr. Baggins was "
forward. 
"""It's  trolls!""  said  Bilbo  from  behind  a  tree.  They  had  forgotten  all  about him. "
"before  them, and  they were forced to  turn away  northwards out  of  their "
silver. Haldir turned towards the Company. 
"of  blind-man's  buff.  The  place  was  full  of  goblins  running  about,  and  the  poor "
"he would not tell.  He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is "
"from their tower, ever she found  some way to snare them. But she lusted for  "
iron-shod shoes before them and behind them and about them. 
"north,  west, and south.  It was thought  that you  might  turn far aside to "
"Tower of Cirith Ungol, but it was steeped in fear and evil still. "
""
The Ring left him.' 
"the drawing-room sofa with a drink at his elbow, and they went back to their dark "
it all. But I added a great many things to the news that it was good for him 
"true story much more likely, and I  couldn't see the point of altering it at "
"thrush was sitting on a rock near by with his head cocked on one side, listening to "
""
"bad  end, if I didn't watch my step, he  did. But  now I don't suppose  I'll "
he 
"     `They took me and they set me alone  on the p innacle of Orthanc, in the "
     Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter! 
head. 
between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.' 
"the point, you and  I, Smjagol. Tell me. Can we  find the rest of the way by "
said Treebeard. 'Do you know him?' 
Aragorn said: 
####-bushes and  brambles were reluctant to  let  them through. They were cut off  
"""If you come in peace lay down your arms!"" said the captain. "
strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He 
"     But in the morning, as Faramir came from the Houses, he saw her, as she "
shape of Gollum's large head and ears against the evening sky. 
now fraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron will expect us 
"museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a  drawer  "
"pass  the day, which already promised to be  bright and warm. A good day for "
"     However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gone "
"####-for  them  all,  and  filled  all  his  spare-rooms  and  made  beds  on  chairs  and  sofas, "
"     `Just so! ' said Sam, not to be put off. `And so we are to walk up  and "
"     'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!' cried the old man, holding up one hand, and "
"bend  where  he  had  to  cross  the  water,  if  he  was  to  make  for  the  camp,  as  he "
"restless. The  cold and wet had  made his wound more painful  than ever, and "
and  looked  no further than their bellies and their well-fed  faces. Though 
"help, too. And even  so he would never  have just  forsaken  it, or  cast it "
"our kindred, had you found the hoard unguarded and us slain."" "
"I do not know the word-yet. But we shall  soon see.  And,' he added,  with  a  "
####- 
"and  I plodded on, mostly  by night, till I stood  by Balin's tomb in Moria. "
"today, by Elrond's orders.' "
set out from Dunharrow; though for all that he could then tell it might have 
Hill. 
of lying low till all  was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He  could 
     A marching host of Elves  had  come up silently:  they  were  hastening 
"####-at  the  unexpected  party  in  his  hobbit-hole,  when  he  said  they  could  sit  on  the "
"has burst at last,' he thought. `This great  array of spears  and  swords is "
"""Ugh!  here  they  are!""  he  said  to  the  horses.  ""They  don't  look  dangerous. You "
""
"Days of the Rings were passed, and an end was come of the story and  song of "
"they'll say: ""Yes, that's one of my favourite stories. Frodo was very brave. "
his 
"     'But we can't,' said Sam, 'not without wings.' "
     But  with that Gandalf stepped  to his side and spoke. 'He came with me 
and thence down the leagues of the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There 
now. What Lugb®rz will do with such  stuff I can't guess. He might as well go 
"will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is  surer of finding "
"Hadrian Bisson,4041598331973,30-05-1980
"
"     `Welcome!' the Elf then said  again in the  Common  Language,  speaking "
clutched the box and bowed as well as he could. 
"seemed.  At any rate he wa s  too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not  quite "
"side of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the further side are the bleak hills "
"     `How then did  he die, and how do  you know of  it? Since  you say that "
"Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away. "
"await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with "
"     'Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot,' said Frodo. "
"sword Glamdring.  Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in  the dim light "
     Warn him! Darn him! 
"""I won't have it,"" said William. ""I caught him anyway."" "
""
land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road. 
####-<h4>Chapter 9 </h4> <br> <br>
Legolas and Gimli with their horse stood close by. 
     `No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.' 
"Roderic Gwilliam,4041599404888418,23-11-1988
"
cried in a loud voice. 
"     He rose and  passed  his  hand  over his eyes, dashing away  the tears.  "
"     'I have quite finished, Sam,' said Frodo. 'The last pages are for you.' "
"     `Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf. "
"     The next day,  though the darkness  had reached  its  full and grew  no "
"in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of "
down to  the  lowest  circle and ask for  the Old  Guesthouse  in  the  Rath 
my mind.' 
"out  to hunt, or  to other business  in  the woods and in the lands to the East. Then if "
     Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash  and sparks;  
"     Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful pipes with "
"Bradan McKirton,4041592083541903,26-01-1976
"
before 
"before, as if they harboured secret eyes and  lurking dangers; now he wished  "
other perils; but it did not  last  long.  Soon the  path reached a  rounded 
"into thick cloud, and  Pippin could not  see anything  a few feet away.  The "
edges softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a  
"Since they were  all hobbits, and were  trying  to be silent,  they made  no "
"gnarled as an old  stone, and the hairs of his scanty beard straggled on his "
"""There  aren't  any  oars.  How  are  you  going  to  push  the  boat  back  to  the  far "
"Lewiss Roos,4041378606834,19-08-1986
"
you will be looked for on the road and not off it.' 
"heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last  year's bracken,  among  "
"find the Ring, and not by its maker.  In which  case you  also were meant to "
"Lilias Alflat,4017950990337049,31-07-1993
"
glimpsed far  off  in  the east the grey-green lines  of the Downs  that lay 
"""Looking behind,"" said he. "
golden  light;  and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros  roared on unchanging. 
you to deny them now.' 
"is your  business there? "" As he said this a lust which he could not conceal "
"and root and mould.  A shadow now lay round the edge of  sight, a dark  haze "
"dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same  birthday, September "
road.' 
"between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is explained.' 'Strange "
"Jacqueline Edeler,4966289640687342,14-03-1998
"
that across the face of  the hill. And each  time that it passed the line of 
""
"     `Better  luck  if  I'd thought  of  it sooner,'  said Sam.  'Maybe  you  "
     He turned and went swiftly  back down  the road. The others climbed the 
"you,' he said. "
"####-there is any path to find. He has  led us in here  against our fears, but he "
"     'Now Thjoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?' said Gandalf. 'Do "
"possible, without  swimming,  along  a narrow  ledge of  the  cliff,  to  the  right  as one "
"they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did not need to delve "
####-     'Well Saruman!' said Gandalf. 'Where are you going?' 
would have prevented them from reaching it  until after nightfall on the day 
Then Thorin stepped up and drew the key on its chain from round his neck. He 
"to you, after all.  I am not asking you to tell me anything you  have a mind "
the  Ring  from  Sauron's hand and  took  it  for his own.  Then  Sauron was 
"shortened, and we cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand  "
hill and field it echoed; and  so compelling  was that call that Sam himself 
"     The others,  surprised  by  his cry,  halted  and turned;  but  Legolas "
"     When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough; "
meal in the hall of the Burg. 
"be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime! ' "
"Atlante Haliday,4041378166294069,20-04-1976
"
the 
O what shall we do with the funny little things?  
"That will be the one that walks with our Elfstone. They are dear friends,  I "
"     Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends would "
     The three companions stood silent and made no answer. 
terraces and  towers upon the Mountain's  sides! Then you would  see that we 
"     'What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me today? "
lay  lost  in  the  forest. There  they dropped off one by one  into uncomfortable  sleep 
"any more interruptions."" Mr. Baggins saw then how clever Gandalf had been. The "
uninjured from the ruin of the town; and in the days that followed there was much 
     He  fell  silent  again;  but  Frodo  could  not help asking  one  more 
princes  than  many  that  have  looked  more  comely  in  it.  But  I  wonder  if  Thorin 
"this age of the world, or for many after."" "
"closed over  them, through all his thoughts there came  the memory of water; "
""
"Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them. "
"hungry and weary. I fled far north out of my way, pursued by wolves."" "
"companies, and as far as eyes could strain in the  mirk there sprouted, like "
"watch; but only if  you promise  to  wake me  halfway  towards  morning,  if "
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It  is a pity that 
evening?  
widening outwards from  a point far out in the lake.  There  was  a bubbling  
something  to  them  in  a  queer  language  like  animal  noises  turned  into  talk.  They 
""
"little  globe  of  pallid  light.  Now  as  came  near,  it  was  tinged  with  a  flickering "
"they rolled away, filled with full but  very  unsatisfied hobbits. Gardeners "
places since the building of  the City. At  last they came to Rath Dnnen and 
with fear. What new terror is this?' 
never 
be no refuge.' 
they  knew that the silence would not last  long. At any moment now the hunt 
"long before,  in the first  days of  the North  Kingdom, they built  a great "
will not be able to stay hidden in the  Shire much longer; and for  your own 
     Bregalad  stood for some  time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they  
returned  to  limb and  heart.  But still the hatred of  the  Watcher lurked 
"     'Neither  does he  use  his right name,  nor permit it  to be  spelt or "
""
potency beat upon his brow.  
"     They were beginning  to look out  for a place  off the Road, where they "
"""Old Smaug  is weary and asleep,"" he  thought.  ""He can't,  see me and he won't "
"world, but to do what is in us for the succour of those years wherein we are "
asking  for a  hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid 
few herbs.' 
"them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and "
all the land; and there  were players upon viols and  upon  flutes and  upon 
"Aluino Seston,4041593208460284,29-06-1996
"
"     'He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road. "
"Aymer Cotta,4041595299082,22-06-1981
"
and spat. 
####-though he kept close to Frodo and avoided the glance of Faramir.  
"Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!' "
drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind. 
"could not  come more swiftly.  Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle "
     'Hush!' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.' 
"said. 'Trust to  luck again! It nearly failed us  last time,  but  it didn't "
     'Keep to  the green grass. Don't you go  a -meddling  with old stone  or  
"rode  the falls  and the foaming pool, and bore him down  through Osgiliath, "
"Elves, sir, when you go?' "
"like a dead land, silent, shadow-folded, waiting for some dreadful stroke. "
for  the last time. In front of  them they saw  the lower lands  dotted with 
"land. 'I've got  things to  do,' he  said:  'my  making and  my  singing, my "
tale that we know. Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir.  Do you know him 
####-their  right great  oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the  hills  under  the 
"storied webs, nor  any things of woven stuff or  of wood, were to be seen in "
"much  anguish.  And now hearing  you speak  I trust you  less, no  more than "
There's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.' 
and they let their ponies walk  at their leisure.  They camped  in the Green 
     'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin. 
"Curtis Boynton,4041599861262677,17-08-1991
"
"     And though I oft have passed them by, "
"and catch a glimpse  far off  of Lurien,  that you  have  seen  only  in our "
their faces and covered their ears  with their claws. Back from the Deep the 
over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the 
Orcs yelled  and shot all the arrows that remained to  them. The hobbits saw 
"been taken from him in Mordor. For Sam he brought a coat of gilded mail, and "
"Nathaniel Lahiff,4017956192480669,22-12-1986
"
"of the  N®menoreans,  fought  beside the  Elves in the first  wars, and were "
"then they couldn't get Lugb®rz to pay attention for a good while, I'm told.' "
     He named the nameless hills and dells; 
"for  long  tales, for  questions and for  answers,  so Tom  will  start  the "
"grey boats had been made ready for  the travellers, and  in  these the Elves "
"Tania Orring,4017956264912334,19-12-1992
"
"     `There  are  the  Walls  of  Moria,' said Gandalf,  pointing across the "
"galloping, passing  in the West. But now they are  drawing ever further from "
hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. The 
     `And it's a good thing neither half  of the old villain don't know what 
"'If we  all got angry together something might be done. But  it's these Men, "
"     'Well, for myself,' said Aragorn, 'it is dark before me. I must go down "
"there was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his eyes there "
"hope left.  But I have to go on trying to get  to the Mountain, as long as I "
sudden 
"Hyacinthia Jellyman,4676071476246455,19-06-2001
"
"Still  the  dwarves  jogged  on,  never  turning  round  or  taking  any  notice  of  the "
"son, be he man or --' "
"Chiquita Duling,4017953375813,23-09-1976
"
"web. Didn't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I "
"and hurled them back into the Deep.  Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it "
Bergil. 'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.' 
"approaching his point with slow relish, 'he came riding on a big black horse "
"stone, that  when unbarred they could  be moved with  a light  thrust of the "
""
over the Old Forest far away. 
"     He sprang past them; but even as he  did so, thrusting the  phial  back  "
"the East, red-stained by the sunset in the West. "
staring at Frodo with a strange light. 'Smjagol will swear on the Precious.' 
"     'And after all, sir,'  added Sam,  'you did  ought to  take the  Elves' "
"Gandalf, mountains, and then  find somewhere where I can  rest. In peace and "
"towards  them,  in  a  single  line,  each  touching  the  back  of  the  one  in  front. When "
""
mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees grew in a circle 
"were come to  the feet  of the  Misty  Mountains, and the long  arms of  Nan "
"Loretta Sills,4041593902687,06-02-1986
"
"accept, he  rode  away with Gandalf. Even  as  they  left  the valley  the  sky darkened "
""
"eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a hump at the  near end of the "
"####-Mountain. That is the usual dwarves' method- I think that is right, isn't it?"" ""Quite "
"fellow!"" "
could be believed of one so stern of face. 'All is well. It was a weary road 
"watch, and the dwarves kept only one watchman at a time. "
"     `Folly it  may seem,' said Haldir. 'Indeed  in nothing is the power  of "
"High towers  that people built, and strong places. and havens of many ships;  "
"Deep-elves  and  the  Sea-elves  went  and  lived  for  ages,  and  grew  fairer  and  wiser "
joy and renewed hope; for now there were men enough to man both the burg 
""
"bumping  crash  into  trees,  and  shouting  and  calling  till  they  must  have  waked "
Sam had little doubt about it: he longed to get  his hands on its  neck. But 
Aragorn said: 
"about  that there were going to be fireworks  - fireworks, what is more, such "
pillars holding up a vast sagging roof. They  seemed to have climbed up many 
"Feodor Constantine,4041371810174613,01-03-1978
"
in her life been popular before. But she was crushed  by the news of  Lotho's 
like a hen on an egg. But it doesn't help much to get no more from you  than 
"cold,  as if dawn were near. Far off in  the West the full moon was sinking, "
"slopes frowned  over  by the  cliff, which  now rose again, higher  and more "
     The  cleft  was  longer and deeper  than it seemed. Some way down  they 
"another  darkness brooding about  the feet of the Misty Mountains,  a shadow "
of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of  Men and 
Time flows on to a spring of little hope.' 
     To Isengard with doom we come! 
do something. I suppose. I have often wondered lately what I should do about 
back.' 
"perhaps,  so unwearyingly fond of  good things not least because they could, "
""
"     'They are sailing,  sailing, sailing over the Sea,  they are going into "
"Eadith Vaugham,4041591318637098,06-11-2000
"
"must be hardy men that go willingly, knowing their peril.' "
 
standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more 
"""Dear  me!  Dear  me!""  said  Bilbo.  ""I  am  sure  this  is  all  very  uncomfortable. "
gone. I tarried  there  in  the  ageless time of that  land where days bring 
"     He stood up and cast open his long black cloak, and behold! he was clad "
"     `Po-ta -toes,' said Sam. 'The  Gaffer's delight, and  rare  good ballast  "
"Alida Cornilleau,4017950420448,06-08-1979
"
"the ground, this way and that, doubtful of the way. 'Yes, they are all round "
"found themselves at the top of a wide steep slope of fallen stones, the remains of a "
"     Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden chill had "
"He  clutched  the Ring  in his hand,  as  if  he saw  already  dark  fingers "
"broods, bastards  of the miserable mates, her own offspring,  that she slew,  "
"dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't dead! ' "
mountains' sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet.  In the distance 
"     As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all "
     Him far from Nimrodel. 
"pouch. 'This is only a repayment in token; for you took more, I'll be bound. "
     'Is it far?' 
     'Then they halted and looked at him and saw that he lived still; but he 
"Balin, and Fili and Kili together, and Dori and Nori and Ori all in a heap, and Oin "
"fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey "
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you  would have  
toiled  and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last  all was  removed 
""
"If  you  say  that again,  I shall.  Then  you  will  see Gandalf  the  Grey "
"burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves. It  was  a sad country, silent  "
""
"Deirdre Nurny,4041593771710,17-01-1996
"
advise him to explain it.' 
"halted, and seemed loth  to ride into the stream; and they  noted that for a  "
"wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf "
####-round his  waist a  worn leather  belt.  On it  he  hung a short sword in  a  
took his friend's hands in his own. The right hand felt icy to the touch. 
"Standing up, he slung  it behind his back,  put an orc-helm on  his head, and "
"blood in the firelight. Doom, doom rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and "
die.' 
"Fina Crim,4041379795374710,21-11-1993
"
"smooth  bole  gleamed  like  grey  silk, and up it  towered, until its first "
to wait and not to leave their master behind. 
"a kind mistress of willing slaves.  War  must  be, while we defend our lives "
I'd clean forgotten it!' 
 
"stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with Saruman, delayed by treason. "
that had gone down the valley. 
have opened the gates you will go  through  them and never return. You are a 
     Jomer and Aragorn stood  together on  the Deeping Wall. They heard  the 
the lowlands. 
in  motion. Then turning south  again  he  beheld Minas Tirith. Far away  it 
"     'Take  back your sword, Jomer, sister -son!'  said  the king. 'Go, Hbma, "
that they had passed there. As they stood for a moment looking at the  white 
"     Drowns on dry land, "
"here, old  trees,  wild trees. The Watchwood we will call it. Not a squirrel "
""
Mablung and Damrod remained. 
"     'I hope so,'  said Frodo.  'But I  hope  that  you may  find some other  "
remained  full of suspicion.  They had been in  fear of pursuit for  so long 
"dwarves'  breathing  like  a  loud  noise.  ""My  toes  are  all  bruised  and  bent,  and  my "
"Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad  and the hobbits. 'Come, join the "
to life again. 
"with his long fingers, and eating  them raw.  He ate  any living thing, even "
""
that the City will be lost ere ten days be gone.' 
all the days of their past life together. But Aragorn said: 'I saw also what 
"Bertine Tuckey,4041379962913,18-08-1976
"
"The  dwarves  were  inclined  to  grumble  at  this,  but  the  wizard  told  them  they "
"pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron. joined by heavy chains.  "
"went to the Three-Farthing  Stone, which is as near the centre of the  Shire "
"Lorettalorna Lamba,4041598936170725,30-10-1979
"
 
"Carey Lingfoot,4266648519489,14-11-1981
"
any time now.' 
"dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the  trees were whispering "
was watching Frodo  intently. Frodo  gazed fixedly at the red embers on  the 
"abominable!  I would give  them Bag  End and everything else, if I could get  "
"city  on the  hill.  The luminous  tower fascinated him,  and he fought  the "
     Chapter 10  The Black Gate Opens  
"""What  are moon-letters?"" asked  the hobbit  full of excitement. He  loved maps, "
"Jo Denes,4041379905524,28-03-1995
"
"Curry Taylder,4017950746198,03-11-1981
"
For  one  thing  Bombur  was  immensely  fat  and  heavy.  Thorin  indeed  was  very 
"he turned away into the forest,' said Aragorn. "
"woods.  Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into   a deep green hollow, "
about -- the seven stars and seven stones?' 
"     Merry seized his hand and kissed it. 'I am frightfully sorry,' he said. "
"     of people long ago, "
under which they  stood.  'I do not  wish to meet that  old  man at unawares 
indeed you will:  quite soon. We shan't hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no!  What 
Frodo. `It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy.' 
"branches  on  either  side  of  them.  There  were  none  stretched  across  the  path,  but "
"the bubbling of Shelob in her misery: and harsh and clear, and very close it "
"misty,  moisty morning  when we  climbed down  and  looked  round again, "
""
"     'To the Mountain, of course.' "
Ruler of Middle-earth.  In that conflict both sides would  have held hobbits 
"ancient  way to  Rauros-foot, and  there take to the water again. Do you not "
the  ruined  Gate of  Minas Tirith. He gave  little  heed to the  wreck  and 
would this do:  and they all  settled  down and  lived together happily ever 
lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unlooked-for. 
"(from a safe distance), if you had seen the dwarves sitting up in the trees with their "
"     'We  are hobbits  from Buckland, and we have a  fancy to travel and  to "
and did not move again. 
brandished his sword. 
you on your head or lay you on your back.' 
"Euphemia Tallquist,4266196449253,15-04-1996
"
"ago  wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not "
"tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned  no longer on his staff; and he "
shieldmaiden  of the North! Was  there  no woman of the race  of N®menor  to 
"     'Very good, sir!' "
but it  is a  hundred leagues and two to Mundburg  where Denethor is lord. I  
"it:"" Well, I'll wa nt it. I can't get it now.' "
behind the highest throne in the midst of all a great standard was spread in 
men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I  saw  the  enemy go: endless 
"""No  good  boiling  'em! We  ain't  got  no  water,  and  it's  a  long  way  to  the  well "
"reverse-but  we  will  do  whatever  we  can  for  you,  and  take  our  share  of  the  cost "
"     ' ""I liked white better,"" I said. "
Captains  of  the  West  were  advancing  and the Dark Lord was speeding his 
"     'Lie down to sleep!' said Treebeard. 'Why of course you do! Hm, hoom: I  "
"Gildor. 'But I already know a little, and I  can read more in your  face and "
"Osmund Maccaig,4167324474694,19-02-1976
"
reason?' he asked.  `Is  there  more  in  it  than  surprise  at seeing four 
and caught a small goblin-imp. How it squeaked! He still had a bone or two left to 
"blow,  or to  screen his shrinking eyes from a dreadful  Eye that sought  to "
"riding shapes, and  faces  out of the past. He  lost count of time, hovering "
there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his 
"Valeria Lindblad,4041374420378061,30-04-1978
"
"most  part in silence, until at last, plucking up courage,  Merry  asked the "
"began. After a while water was brought to them,  and then they were led to a  "
"course,  that  the  riddle-game  was  sacred  and  of  immense  antiquity,  and  even "
"Dena Huniwall,4886157854160636,27-07-1986
"
"feeling very grumpy, and was far from happy about the giants himself. "
"Bradney Gadie,4041374441041821,06-12-1997
"
keep 
"     The crouching  shape  backed away, terror in its blinking eyes, and yet "
"Elroy Kornyakov,4204148818093,06-05-1990
"
"he set out on his  memorable journey, and he was old  even for Hobbits,  who "
"his  fury, stooping  now and  again to  stab and  slash  it with his  knife. "
"Silvanus Kemsley,4041593747947643,17-11-1995
"
returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to 
"Orthanc! Good-bye!"" "
lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb down and you  must  
as  they  opened  in  the  sky.  From  their  town  the  Lonely  Mountain  was  mostly 
"""It  is  well  that  I  have  found  you!""  said  the  man  striding  forward.  ""You  are "
"defences,  the Rammas made with so  great  a  labour. And the Enemy must "
"Leontine Zaniolini,4041370369514,30-07-1997
"
"     'I  did not mean  the danger that we all  share,' said Frodo. 'I mean a  "
     'But Gandalf spoke of a  rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor '  said 
"thing, the  tale  he told of his loss agreed  with  that which Bilbo has now "
"     'It will be  enough if you send one to guide  us,  lord,' said Legolas.  "
"stirrups  up to the saddle-skins, and  you must sit as tight as you can. But "
the  Entmaiden  of old.  For  the Entwives were bent  and  browned  by their  
"number of folklands,  which still bore the names of some of  the old leading  "
"     'Drink  this!'  said  Glorfindel  to  them, pouring for  each in turn a  "
"into  the  bay  and  fell  on  the  smooth  rock-face.  The  old  thrush,  who  had  been "
"safe, for it is a very precious thing.' "
"we do? And what  is  the use of sending a hobbit!""  they cried, as if it was his fault. "
Gandalf had gone. 
but no living man may pass it.' 
"learned their speech or their  names. They will be wanting man-food, and you "
"sea -birds whirling like a white dust  in the  sun, and  beneath them a green "
"Cormallen, and here was a squint-eyed rascal calling the Ring-bearer  'little "
"""Never mind that for the moment! What are we to do now,  to-day?"" "
"a stairway opened before them. Again  they halted, and  again they  began to  "
hideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes. 
"he looked  ahead, and he saw two things  that increased his  dismay.  He saw "
"Thjoden rode away, concerning which only hasty tidings  had yet reached her; "
I  want  not;  or  that  you  feel  good  this  morning;  or  that  it  is  morning  to  be  good 
"First he was a conspirator, now he's a  jester.  He'll end up  by becoming a  "
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. `I  will do now what I 
travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading towards the 
 
     After  half an hour Pippin said: 'I hope  we  have not turned  too much 
"     'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr.  Butterbur,  producing a letter  "
####-for their wailing  voices spoke to me of the Sea. The Sea!  Alas! I have not 
"day there  came no dawn, and the Grey Company passed on into the darkness "
"Fay Edelheid,4017950940668,07-06-1983
"
     'I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it. 
"lose,  or it'll  be the end anyway.  The war's begun, and  more than  likely "
with  horror staring  into the pit. Even  as Aragorn and Boromir came flying 
first to the gate and the ending of  their march.  Though the drivers yelled 
faithful  steward.  Let your  counsellor Grnma  keep  all  things till  your 
"in the hills, and wish to face peril and battle.' "
"less than you might, and  not more than you should. Hm, this is  a bundle of "
of pine-wood. 
"Mountain's foot; but from it there was no more escape. It was an island now,  "
"not keep the arrow, for we had much to  do. It was, as I remember, just such "
"before me, and by  his leave  Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now "
"now as they ha ve lived, and few  shall keep what they call their own. But of "
call. 
"Salome Boucher,4478038468968594,14-01-1977
"
"and lots of other things which he did not understand, and did not want to, for they "
"     'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go  for a walk!' he said. 'I  am Bregalad, "
""
"Micky Eles,4041378156855,26-07-1982
"
the high-banked causeway. 
 
under their mantles were long grey robes;  upon  their grey hairs were helms 
"Huntley Samwyse,4041371478074,01-03-1989
"
"Merry. 'We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It seems almost  "
"     'Lord, hear me!'  he said.  'Now  we feel the peril that we  were warned "
"new-built Meduseld,  and he came never to the  high seat of which he was the "
"do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug -- aye, half  a mug  -- of beer would "
"upwards  into  the  king's  cellars.  There  stood  barrels,  and  barrels,  and  barrels;  for "
####-very  afraid  but  could  not  call  out  or  do  anything  but  lie  and  look.  Then  he 
"eastward  now, he led them up  the slope;  and  then suddenly  there  it was "
"are beats me. Why, it  will take weeks before we  get all these things sized "
Rocks were buried down from on high by the goblins above; but they held on. 
"     `Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,' he said, `but that does not "
this: Saruman is a fool. and a dirty treacherous fool. But the  Great Eye is 
"woods. What had come over them? Why had they dashed off like that, taking "
""
"     `Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my precious,  "
"to their pace,  then  at sundown  yesterday they would reach  the borders of "
"willing. Now you should be grateful, for I do  not give this counsel gladly. "
     'Come forth!'  they cried. 'Let the Lord of the Black   Land come forth!  
"Eolanda Menichini,4041375048852148,16-04-1984
"
     The others halted startled; but the  cry  fell as if muffled by a heavy 
"####-     The  drink was  like water, indeed very like  the taste of the draughts "
"the year round, but there is little other light.' "
"I believe I have kept."" He drew from a pocket in his old jacket (which he still wore "
"is no use arguing. I have, as I  told you, some pressing business away south; and I "
Dwarf  Gluin's son warn you against foolish  words.  You speak evil of  that 
"the river it rolled towards them, going northward. "
"Bilbo's  hand.  He  sat  still,  shivering  and  whispering.  At  last  Bilbo  could  wait  no "
     While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears. 
"Conan Hickin,4041594715490723,09-06-1982
"
"bring. For  one thing, tomorrow will  be certain to bring  worse than today, "
"waken,  or so  one must  read the words,' he  insisted. `If then you are the "
Mount Doom. 
"that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.' "
####-     'Where to? ' 
without any words  being  spoken. They  heard eerie noises in  the  darkness 
"is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer, "
Ranger should be with a clear trail to follow. There is some will that lends 
"itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End. "
question that was tormenting him. 
     'The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!' 
out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have spoken with the White Lady.' 
unwanted  or unwatched.  The road to the gate  was blocked  with barrows and 
the Tower.  They had escaped for the moment. Cowering back  against the rock  
The horses were standing by him with their noses at his shoulder.  
"keep them in. It was indeed one  of the works of Gondor long ago, an eastern "
our 
"out here, until it pleases Thjoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.' "
escape  from  the  crowded  life  of  Brandy  Hall  for a  time.  It  was an 
"has happened here of late, nor in what mind the Rohirrim may now  be between "
"bitter and  oily, or  so they would have said at home. Here it seemed beyond "
"became duller, both touch and hearing seemed to grow numb, and they kept on, "
"     In the dead night, Frodo lay  in a dream without light. Then he saw the "
brought  them to the brink of the narrow gully that they   had struck before; 
the speech of the oldest of all living things.' 
thinks 
not  know  that  the  hobbit  had  already  caught  a  glimpse  of  his  peculiar  under-
Down you drop! 
"death to  Minas  Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his "
"boats. They must be small and light, for  if you go far  by water, there are "
"way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came "
dropped  over the  further edge of the road. It  had a  high kerb  by  which 
"no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while  I can stand on my legs. Me "
"but many more replaced  them, and Orcs sprang up them like  apes in the dark "
"     till Moon should fade, an orb‚d star "
"Tallie Brimm,4041371893041,24-11-2001
"
"     'It will not be long I fear,' said Jomer, 'ere the coming of the king's "
"""Farewell!""  they  cried,  ""wherever  you  fare,  till  your  eyries  receive  you  at  the "
"Sayers Charlet,4041598763315203,12-07-1983
"
"Sam Dymott,4074873300009,07-09-1993
"
further off.  In the dead  of the night many shining eyes were  seen peering 
"     'These  leaves,' he said, 'I have  walked far to  find; for  this plant "
     'That  night  we  rested  while  others  laboured.  For there were many 
"course,  that the  birthday-presents  were always new,  there were one or two "
"narrow  way  they  laid  aside  sword  and  spear,  and  came  on  towards  the  Gate. "
"must  be  careful  not  to  annoy  him,  or  heaven  knows what will  happen. He can be "
through  the  crack  of  the  door. Every  now  and  again  through  the  night  they  could 
Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap.  The noise 
"long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps. ' "
and rode up  towards Stock to see if you had fallen in  any ditches. But I'm 
"The  heads had vulture-faces, and on  their  great knees were  laid clawlike "
"Izzy Kenderdine,4017953509544,16-03-1983
"
"it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent  on it. It is his great hope and "
gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder. 
"forward.  ""A  couple  of  feet  and  you  would  have  dropped  it  on  to  the  boat.  Try "
trust Sam with one. 
Dark Tower. 
"peace, I mean?' "
hardier 
"dangling  from  it.  ""That  was  a  good  pull,  my  lads;  and  a  good  job  that  our  rope "
"madness of haste was on  me, and he would not listen, but drew sword against  "
songs?' 
"that I  have heard,' he said, `I think that this task  is appointed for you, "
us  is  the  fair valley of Rivendell where Elrond  lives  in  the Last Homely House.  I 
"Chico Scriviner,4014701061100,26-12-1978
"
"thankfulness  for bread  and meat and water, he began to wonder what had become "
"Loy Yukhov,4041373091537,25-08-1998
"
thick  spider-rope  run  hastily  backwards  and  forwards  from  trunk  to  trunk.  Out 
 
"you?""  it  squeaked,  as  it  left  the  pocket;  and  William  turned  round  at  once  and "
his rotting carcass. 
     But  the victory did  little to  enhearten the captains.  'It  is but a  
""
"ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder  felt "
     'I did mean to  - but I have had to change my mind. I  may be away for a  
####-own. 
"laughing and talking  and singing, while the Shirriffs stumped along  trying "
handle his head gently and stroke his great flanks. 
not from  the wound. See! that  is healing. Had he been smitten by some dart  
"he might be gone  away  some  time, or  he might be lying out on the mountain-side "
"####-should have  been  borne in  honour  into this  city,' he said.  'He has well "
Enter now and see! ' 
"Marlene Fenna,4017955069756771,01-02-1976
"
ring  itself  might  tell if it were the One.  The memory  of  words  at the 
bright as  night came on. Others at Merry's orders  were setting up barriers 
parts with what strength they had left. 
     and darkling woods he walked at will. 
"the moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo, your heir. Let  "
"Ansley Duggon,4041378758793767,30-03-1985
"
""
"of the mallorn-tree grew  out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept "
"     Wormtongue cowered down and whimpered: 'No, no!' "
"your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we si t, "
"down.  Aragorn smote to the ground the  captain that stood  in his path, and "
"lie in your eyes, as I feared. But  he did not speak long with you.  A fool, "
by many lives of trees. They  are all  roused now. and  their mind is all on  
long  escape from  pain; soon  the iron grip of  merciless hands was on  him 
"it had started it never stopped, while  the Company was moving. But  it  was "
them or deeply move them. As a guide I had only my own  feelings for what is 
"     In glades beneath the misty fell, "
"####-They  soon  came  to  a wooden  gate,  high  and  broad,  beyond which  they could "
"####-     'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The  Ring was  trying to "
"face. But, ow! this wind is cold!"" "
     The hobbits' packs were brought to them (a little heavier than they had 
"that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but it looked as if it was just  "
"the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside the road, until they stood  "
him. Horses reared and screamed. Men cast  from the saddle lay grovelling on 
"""I  don't  need  your  service,  thank  you,""  said  Beorn,  ""but  I  expect  you  need "
"within about two days' march of Dale, coming from the North-East. "
But the Orcs were after him. Some suddenly loomed up right in front of him. 
""
"Further  in  his  last  battle  Smaug  destroyed  the  dwellings  of  the men  of  Esgaroth, "
"""A very ticklish business, it was,"" he said. ""Touch and go!"" "
"Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more  importance "
 
 
"     `Well, I can read no more for a long way,'  said  Gandalf, 'except  the "
"####-     'The murderous rogue!' cried Jomer.  But Gandalf was unmoved.  No, that "
"Courtney Dicken,4637644481871380,25-06-1998
"
     After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring  again. He seemed to be 
him. 
"Healing and walked alone in the garden, and her face grew pale again, and it  "
"by  Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become famous in  the world at large, "
the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.  
"     At  length they stopped, and sat  side  by  side, their backs against a  "
"laughing. He had made quite a dent on the beautiful door; he had also, by the way, "
"Valentino Cleeton,4041591713474,01-08-2001
"
"refuge.  You, Legolas, must answer to us for them. Call  us, if  anything is "
will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep.' 
before and dropped softly to  the ground. Then he made his way stealthily to 
them. But sit now!' 
end  of  the  longest  they  fastened  one  of  the  large  iron  hooks  they  had  used  for 
"side  of  it! Where was Gandalf? Of  that neither they nor the goblins had any idea, "
"frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. `We guessed, yes we "
filled  with a  new hope in the midst of darkness. Out  from the beleaguered 
"Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from "
"marshes and the desert  were  behind them. Before  them, darkling  against a  "
####-a Man answer?' 
"Franny Orteau,4507220500838168,29-08-1977
"
"swords that they use. Now goblins are cruel, wicked, and bad-hearted. They make "
them from escaping where they could. They drove many of them into the Running 
now!' 
"been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who  has taken  over "
"Berri Roots,4041591545058,24-01-1992
"
"take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too "
"     `You may soon desire to sleep,' he said, 'and especially good  Samwise, "
     'Neither have those others who go with thee. They go  only because they 
founded?  ' 
"much noise, you'll wake the Chief's Big Man.' "
"Rycca Peterkin,4635530781679932,17-11-1993
"
presence of evil goblins  in  that part of  the mountains. But  their main gate used  to 
"Sheffield Alster,4041377318274,08-08-1988
"
far-seen as it  had been veiled and misty  when they stood upon the knoll in 
     'What is happening there?' 
of the  Shire. Three  Elf-towers of immemorial age were still to be seen  on 
door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led  also up 
"could catch us napping. Well, he won't: not Sam Gamgee for one. ' "
"with the  guide, the followers are blameless.  Do not repent of your welcome  "
"to deal with the Ring. It has  grown, and I have  not.  But tell me: what do "
spoke to Ghvn in a strange throaty language. 
"after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?' "
risk  - though even when  I was far away there has never been a day when the 
"it, as I think. an eagle? ' "
     Down from  the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce  cry  that echoed in  the 
"roasting. If  I  had  got this  at  once,  we  might all have  been safe  in "
"Nicole Mordecai,4041374353563,26-08-1993
"
"high above the sunset, when the  Company,  with all  the speed  they  could,  "
     'Now!' said Sam. 'At last  I can deal with you!' He leaped forward with 
"right,' he said with an effort. I will.' Then he shrugged his shoulders, and "
not  encouraged  in  their  friendship  by  their  elders.  I  am  sorry  to  say  he  did  not 
trestles and laden  with gear .  This was plain and unadorned  for  the  most 
"came pouring out, and  with cheers and loud cries they followed  the company "
barren hills. And the  terror of the Sleepless Dead lies  about  the Hill of 
Moria.' 
"eaten with  us, and we  bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between "
hearts of the hobbits rose. 
"Stormie Ruddell,4041594690858431,18-09-1985
"
"now  to  the  dwarves,  Bilbo  had  not  heard  it.  He  wanted  to  know  how  the  wizard "
"dreams in  a false peace, and  for a while  all evil is  withdrawn. Fare you  "
"     `Sleep!'  said  Frodo and sighed, as if out of  a desert  he had seen a  "
"Tabby McEvon,4017951969217071,14-10-1995
"
"sprang in, inside the arches of  her legs, and  with a quick  upthrust of his "
"     Then it seemed to Gimli  and Legolas who were nearby that she wept, and "
of Minas Tirith.' 
seven leagues ere we reach the wall of the townlands. Along most of that way 
strong  even  for  dwarves.  In  battle  they  wielded  heavy  two-handed mattocks;  but 
"a  green terrace,  at the foot of which a bright  spring gushed from a stone "
get it over. 
the  face of  the Mountain. Looking down  they  saw  that they were at the top of the 
"Enemy knows now that the  One is found,  that it was  long in the Shire; and "
"     `It will do well, if it ever comes to that,' said Frodo. "
     'Have they  gone at last? ' said Gollum. `Nassty wicked Men!  Smjagol's 
"Thrain's son Oakenshield, may your beard grow ever longer,"" he said crossly, ""say "
""
"""Hm, well, I find you are not such  hasty  folk as I thought. You  said much "
"     upon us and all  our friends, a war in which only the use  of  the Ring "
"worse: half the inhabitants would follow them,  to see what they were up to,  "
"Bernadette Groucock,4041595156372262,31-08-1975
"
distress  and  amazement he found that he was no  longer looking at Bilbo; a  
"lane of pale-blue sky, around them  the dark overshadowed  River, and before "
"""This  is  the  great  chamber  of Thror,""  said Thorin; ""the hall of  feasting and of "
it?  ' 
"dwarves went, and  they met no sign of any  living  thing, only furtive shadows that "
Mordor for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to 
"several others. There he stood in front of Pippin, looking him up and down. "
filled  now with  the voice  and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it 
and cunning. Even now he plays a game with  peril and wins a throw. Hours of 
himself to be led away at the soft word of his master. 
"horsed and able to  fight, some three thousand under the command of Elfhelm, "
     And with that they passed into the House; and as  they went towards the 
"     'That is as it should be,' said Aragorn. 'In  Minas Tirith  they endure "
"passed  over  them,  or they would  stand, letting  their  weapons fall from "
look in the bloom of health.' 
"believe that we may meet again in  a time to come, and perhaps we shall find "
"about last harvest,  end o'  September maybe,  that  we first heard of  him. "
"journey: I have something to do before the end. I must see  it through, sir, "
But they  would do well to start early; for weather in  that  country was  a  
""
matter  aside  once  again.  `For I  would  learn more  of Minas  Ithil  and 
In  that  lonely  place   Frodo  for  the  first  time  fully  realized  his 
where  he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both 
And there  were  always too few children  in  this  city; but now there  are 
"Hyacinthia Bouller,4041372146100,25-06-2001
"
"slept,' he said, 'lest with age the body should grow soft and timid.' "
know: what  was  in his  heart and  thought  in his latest hours. Whether he 
Old Noakes; 'and it was Drogo's weight as sunk the boat.' 
and  could not guess in that misty light. that they  were in  fact only just  
sinew  and limb beyond the measure of mortal  kind. But  now a  new decision 
Deeping-coomb and  out into  the Westfold  Vale.  There  in the  Hornburg at 
"neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy "
'Come!  We have  spent all  the time that is allowed to a meeting  of parted 
them  pass  marvelled to see such companions; for Legolas was fair  of  face 
"hurried  after  him,  still  cautiously,  though  his  chief  fear  now  was  of  tripping  on "
 
"in Thjoden's eye, and at  the last he rose from his seat to his full height, "
couple of hundreds years or more ago. The Men of Dale used  to have  the  trick of 
"     Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone, "
"Winne Yarham,4041596383082815,06-06-1998
"
"####-""Not at all far. I shouldn't think above twelve yards."" "
"saw tears on that once tearless face, more unbearable than wrath. "
the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew a deep breath. 
"remarkably well,  very much  better  than a hobbit would  understand, say, a  "
you feel honoured by his concern.' 
"and Gondor. And the hangings  of  the bed were of  green and white, but upon "
for water.  
"bread, and stripes  too, by  mimicking  his counsellors. Ah me!'  he paused, "
years of blessedness!' said Thjoden.  He turned to the  men of his household 
hundred-and-eleventh birthday  (S.R.  1401).  At  this  point  this  History 
That's what Bilbo Baggins hates- 
####-There is the old man.  All in dirty  grey  rags: that is why I could not see 
"not  camped  before  on  this  journey,  and  though  they  knew  that  they  soon  would "
thing could be seen. Often Aragorn wondered  that they saw no sign  of beast 
"arms; wolves  were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was "
"ahead, and still high above, Frodo, looking up, saw, as he guessed, the very "
within the northern  borders of the marshes. the  main expanse of  which lay 
"     'Hobbits! Four  hobbits! And what's more,  out  of  the Shire  by their "
"In places deep, where dark things sleep, "
"     'Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad  to say,'  said Frodo; `though I "
"little boat, and he rowed about quite quietly on the lake; for lake it was, wide and "
"skins  for  carrying water,  and  I will give you  some bows  and  arrows. But  I doubt "
"like silver in  the  air, and ceased: the third hour from the rising of  the "
a  great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of  stone set 
Treebeard 
"his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good "
"forward? Only  thing  to  do! On we  go!""  So  up  he  got,  and  trotted  along with  his "
thought to be dead.  And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes 
"open a crack, and  I  lost  lots of buttons,"" he  said  sadly  looking at his  torn clothes. "
"narrow  saddle  between two  higher points, and the  land fell  steeply away "
 
"It's in the family, as you might  say. Why, my grand-dad, and my  uncle Andy "
until at last Thorin spoke: 
below.  
"Beniamino Piletic,4041591461637,07-02-1977
"
"golden mist. Upon the one side their  sight reached  to the grey Emyn  Muil,  "
whined overhead or struck the  water nearby; but there were no more hits. It  
"     'Because two Black Riders have  overtaken us today,  or one has done so "
"clouds and the wind turning  westward. Legolas and  Gimli were early abroad, "
looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he 
"Mathom-house, I suppose.' "
"with  its  help,  though  it  stuck  to  his  hand  and  hurt  him,  he  scrambled  up-only  to "
"they had buried,  still hidden  and untouched.  ""I have  enough  to  last me my  time,"" "
     'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo. 
bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring  
     `Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? ' asked Sam. 
gorgyn  knock them down with earth -thunder and with clubs of black iron. They 
####-<h4>Chapter 12</h4> <br> 
""
"     'Indeed we  will,' they said,  and he took them aside into the shade of "
"     'Dawn is not far off,' said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him. "
louder. 
"race, it filled  a smooth-hewn channel with  a  dark  force of water flecked "
"Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we "
     There  they sat and  made such a meal as they could. Keeping  back  the 
"     'I should like to  save  the Shire, if I could  - though there have been "
"that you were  not  with them,  Gandalf sent me to  look  for you.  Poor old "
"     Then  Merry stooped and  lifted his hand to kiss  it,  and  lo! Thjoden "
going the right way about it. I don't believe that fool of a Pimple's behind 
"     'It'll  be near  the back, I  guess,' Sam  muttered.  `The  whole Tower  "
"grandmother, who  had lots  of beautiful  things of  that kind. A ridiculous "
"jagged  top. Over  it  a trickling water  dripped, through a wide cleft that "
"####-Lord,  but  they were overcome  by the evil king of Carn Dym in  the Land of "
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side. 
"""Poor  little blighter,""  said William. He had  already had  as much  supper  as he "
the lowering sky. Unnoticed a Rider came up and spoke softly in the hobbit's 
"Shire, could  now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening, "
"evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night.  I am sure of it, even under  "
"friendly  terms,  minding their  own affairs in  their own  ways,  but  both "
thick  as  a  young  tree-trunk  -but  he  was  sent  spinning  up  into  the  top  of  some 
     'Need we wait until morning then? ' said Gandalf. `It is as I said. The 
"     'No,' said Gandalf.  'But he still  lived when I  left him. Yet  he  is "
"     Merry and  Pippin heard,  clear  in  the  cold  air,  the  neighing  of "
"on?"" Not until  then did  they notice  that Gandalf was missing. So far he had come "
"the ground, right in the path of the stream which looped itself about it, was a great "
dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui; 
asked Gandalf?' 
"     'If you  would  learn  that,  you  should come  with me  to  Isengard ' "
"for  Pippin felt imprisoned indoors, and stifled even in the  lofty citadel. "
and there were patches of grass upon its sides. 
"but hovels compared with  the caverns I have  seen here: immeasurable halls, "
"     'What's the matter, Mr. Frodo?' said Sam. "
Bree-hill and the  villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland  
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the  village. 
"watching him day and night, making him walk before  me with a halter  on his "
"     'I  am  old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in "
     'Now I understand what seemed so strange to me!' said Pippin shuddering 
     'The labour would be hard and long:  there are no stones that we  could 
####-Frodo. `But if you  really wish to be free of  him again. then you  must help 
"conspiracy. I  did not know Bilbo, of course, as  well as I know you; I  was "
"the truth said Aragorn. But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of "
"the eastern side. But we are  high up, a good deal higher than  the  Dimrill "
"even so, as Ring-bearer and as one that has borne it on finger and seen that "
"days  to come;  for we  have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is  not yet  at "
had brought from Bree. 
"""We  shall  be  bruised  and  battered  to  pieces,  and  drowned  too,  for  certain!"" "
"was defeated. He dared go no  further. He had  lost:  lost his prey, and  lost,  too,  the "
"     The Rider looked at them  with  renewed wonder, but  his eyes hardened. "
"suffocate in here!"" "
     This  is  only  a  small  selection of  the assembled presents. Bilbo's 
"apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and "
expected. I never hoped to get across. I can't see any  hope  of it now. But 
"came  to a  grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and  in the midst was a  "
bit into him. He shut his eyes and slipped back into evil dreams.  
""
no ledge and the wa ll was sheer and even undercut for  a short  space; there 
""
"ever looked on  a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly "
     Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?  
"delighted in  parties, and  in  presents, which  they  gave away freely  and "
"ended Bilbo; ""so I said  'what's in my pocket?' And he couldn't guess in three goes. "
People. 
"Kimberli Pohls,4289547463685622,11-07-1996
"
followed after him as quickly as he could. Not far from the near bank of the  
"Bernard Regitz,4017958204827663,02-11-1993
"
"had then); and all the others were busy with Thorin. It was unlikely that any, even "
"Lake-men were at the back of the plans, and that most of the plunder was meant to "
####- 
"about him, and Dernhelm was with  them. Ahead nearer the walls Elfhelm's "
"the  flats to the west. It dived into  dells,  and hugged steep  banks;  and "
So  they  sang as  first one barrel and  then another  rumbled  to  the dark opening 
"running round and round (as he thought) and calling and calling: ""Dori, Nori, Ori, "
     `Here is  the gift  of Celeborn  and  Galadriel to the  leader  of your 
"moon had  passed  into  the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But "
"three tubs, and  a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, mats "
"say  the  runes,  but  Smaug  could  not  creep  into  a  hole  that  size,  not even when he "
"slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus  men reached  at last the High Court, "
"rumour of him, and we guess  that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but "
"Old  Entish  as you might say. It is a lovely  language, but it takes a very "
"roof-top, Sam to  his amazement  saw  that one  of the  sprawling bodies was "
"What has it got in its pocketses? Oh we guess, we guess, my precious. He's found "
over the edge. They saw a valley far below. They could hear the voice of hurrying 
"     Frodo  was roused  by Sam. He found  that  he was  lying, well wrapped,  "
had floated up from the South and the distant seas. The rushing of the River  
stream becomes tortuous and much divided. There the Entwash flows in by 
"be found, and they  looked in vain for the  bodies of the  dead. No trace of "
""
"that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang. "
harness? It should be rich and fair.' 
many 
gladly. 
nose. 
"Now, Gandalf,  you said   that  you had counsel to  give, if I would hear it.  "
Fields 
"Giana Duckett,4041376374732,30-08-1993
"
     Let them pass! Let them pass! 
"meanwhile we had better go  no further. Let  us rest, if we can. Things have "
"Merry! I leave you in  good hands,  better  than we hoped when we hunted the "
"always  said  to  himself.  But  who  knows  how Gollum  came  by  that  present,  ages "
in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush and roar of the 
     He then  pointed  out  and named those whom Frodo  had  not met before. 
"horses,  and  pale  banners  like   shreds   of   cloud,  and   spears  like "
muttering and snarling. 
"Onfre Marques,4962678834448,04-09-1977
"
to  fall at last upon the walls of  the Black Land and wander fruitless down 
"dwarf. 'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!' "
"faded,  and they were back  in the sunlit world. It was time to start again. "
them;  as  they  sprang  forward  their  feet  slithered  on  stones  rubbed  smooth  and 
"did not  speak to Gollum or make h is choice. His eyes were closed, as if  he "
"I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria  "
southern march of Wilderland. 
"kill  me,  and  I  ran,  and  fell  over,  and  he missed me  in  the  dark.  Then  I  followed "
"nearly through this adventure yet,"" he added, and that was pretty true as well. "
     where ever foaming billows roll 
"     Gandalf laughed grimly. 'You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily "
     'Yes!' said  Pippin.  'I  know  what you mean.  There might be  all the 
"those who  are Dead,  and the Dead keep it, until the time comes. The way is  "
"and the memory of  your  burden is heavy, then  you may pass  into the West, "
Lightning!  
"sombre is their  gear than  the  others', and  they are fair and  gallant as "
"planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.' "
"his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone "
"walking about my woods. He was polite in  those days, always asking my leave "
"simple matters.  We will ride for a few  hours, gently, until we come to the "
 
"it?  Thirty ells, or  say, about eighteen fathom: that's  no  more than your "
"to  me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may  be coming out  this  way "
"watchers,  but  most of them lay  on  the ground,  resting  in the  pleasant "
"was the first to recover. Again he pulled  at their cloaks urgently,  but he "
"whisper to  Aragorn. He made no  answer, he was gazing  intently at the sky; "
"     `Here it  is!'  he cried.  'There is  a  way down inside, yes.  Now  we "
the  Wold.  A  mist  shrouded the sun. Ever nearer  the  tree-clad slopes of 
     The Western Seas have passed away: 
"make you squeak,  you miserable rat.' He stooped over  Pippin  bringing  his "
"or journey, but this endless  chase began to tell on him, as all hope failed "
hungry.  Just  now  however  the  prisoners  were  thinking  only  of  themselves.  The 
in  a  little  picture drawn  by  elven-fingers  he  saw  the Lady Galadriel 
"     And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord  of Gondor, Steward "
"     Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the "
     Quickly  Sam  unslung  his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed at the 
"landslide.  When  they  began  to  go  down  this,  rubbish  and  small  pebbles  rolled "
very nice.' 
"out again. ""Guess again!"" "
seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it 
"####-know one another better.  When we do, I hope you will explain  what happened "
not be seen. 
singing. Not for the last time! 
Jomer 
"you.  He is ancient in years now, according to his kind; and  he awaits you, "
"Martino Palfrie,4947378994121,11-10-1998
"
and Wild Men can go back to sleep in the wild woods.' 
date  was October the sixth. Two years before on that day it was dark in the 
"`Wolves won't get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake! Nearly singed "
`Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him 
"     'Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,' "
"     Then Aragorn laid his hand  gently to the sapling, and lo! it seemed to "
passage. Merry came  in  with a  rush followed  by  Nob.  He shut  the  door  
"roused himself and spoke of eating and making ready for yet  another effort, "
"dare to tread, what safety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of "
of something solid. And even lembas is none the worse for a change.' 
family had had nothing  to do with the old quarrel I have spoken of. Consequently 
"White."" And that title seemed to anger him. "
almost  it would have served  for  a hall of Men upon the earth. He  entered 
 
"     `What's  that, Strider? It don't look  like  a  cloud,' said  Sam  in a  "
stay  with me until  Gandalf and your master arrive; or to  cross the water. 
"only that it was a delight to  hear the  voice  speaking, all  that it  said "
"you?"" and other things of that sort, but there was no answer.  "
""
"away  up on the north side,  if anyone wants to see  me. There  is no  clean "
had picked up among the wreckage of  Isengard. Hasufel was  already saddled. 
"often,  certainly  not  in  the  daytime,  and  it  is  no  good  waiting  for  him.  In  fact  it "
"Quintilla Farreil,4596249911556,30-09-1996
"
"Mattias Thorneley,4017953269996008,19-06-1996
"
"Pavla Corton,4973285234427,13-10-1985
"
under  the stars when it  was  fearless  -  before  the Dark  Lord came  from 
"     'Where d'you  think   you're  going?'  said  one,  the largest and  most  "
"     `It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,' said Faramir. 'But I "
"peace, or die if that be his doom.' "
"hillmen  and they seemed over large for me, so  I sat  beside a stone to see "
"Sherline Castletine,4017952992245881,13-05-1978
"
"swords were drawn; but I know not whether their blades would still bite, for  "
"know  the  reason.  It  was  the  Arkenstone,  the  Heart  of  the  Mountain.  So  Bilbo "
shone suddenly in his eyes.  
things.  He  had  a  feeling  that  the  answer  was  quite  different  and  that  he  ought  to 
slipped on  when he stuck out  his hand with a jerk to save his  fall. For a  
"what people have been  doing, and just what these  ruffians like.  They will "
"pines on the hills. Ragged clouds  were hurrying overhead,  dark and low. As "
     'Raise the Shire!' said Merry. 'Now! Wake all our people! They hate all 
"     'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled. "
raiment of many colours and garlands of flowers.  
"Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.' "
basin in the rocks. until they found  their  way out  again through a narrow 
you spoke of?' 
"king's men  went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down "
"     'So it  will, if  I  have not returned before the sundown-bells,'  said "
"He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest peg, and ""Dwalin at your service!"" he "
have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.' 
"your  death,'  answered  Gandalf.  'And only the  heathen  kings, under  the "
from  hanging  most  of  the  night  and  the  next  day  wound  round  and  round  with 
"Mountain, and beams of gold fell on the pavement at the threshold. "
quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated  
"Hobbits  of Bree went as far as  Buckland, or the  Eastfarthing; but  though "
"thing  I  wanted: a bit of light. Enough  to help  us, and yet I guess  it's "
thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the House 
"""Well  done!  Mr.  Baggins!""  he  said,  clapping  Bilbo  on  the  back.  ""There  is "
way.' They could not get him to say more. The name of the perilous place and 
'But my lord sends word that we must  set ourselves in readiness: orders may 
"less  for  breakfast.  There  they  all  sat  glum  and wet  and muttering, while Oin  and "
the darkness. Over all the leagues of waste before the gates of Mordor there 
""
"the  Gore, as you would  say, for it is the land that lies like a spear -head "
"     Here  now  for  seven  days they tarried, for the  time was at hand for  "
"Arluene Karpeev,4243250874014582,26-09-1988
"
Orcs. 
"straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the riders wheeled away out "
####-cannot tell. It  is  not  mist  or  cloud that defeats  my  eyes: there is a  
"####-There,  peeping among the cloud-wrack  above  a  dark  tor high  up  in  the "
"     `Got him! ' hissed Gollum in his ear. `At  last, my precious, we've got "
seen  his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make 
     Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses  had given very lively 
may come with me. There we may see strange things.' 
rushing by and  the wind sang loudly in his ears. He could  see nothing  but 
"""Well,  if  you  know  of  anywhere  better, take us there!"" said Gandalf, who was "
"####-Hobbits.  They passed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been  built  in "
####-challenge battle. And it must move soon.  Therefore I ask the Captains: what 
"     `He is  debating  which course  is  the most desperate, I think,'  said "
small  cloud  flying from the  accursed hills; a  black  shadow loosed  from 
"Viviyan Braunton,4041598385647249,18-05-1995
"
"Gandalf must follow  me.'  He  turned to go back, and  then  slopped, for he "
"no reason can deny. Jowyn, Jowyn, White Lady of Rohan, in this hour I do not "
"the Master who ruled them could not have said. Gollum used to wear it at first, till "
Sam's vision in the Mirror  had not prepared  him for what they saw. The Old 
"can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or  day.' "
away!' 
"movement to be seen, but the hobbits crept by cautiously, keeping as much as "
hither. Did you not know?' 
shall ride too. Go! You have ye t time to clean the rust from your sword.' 
"Devy Plaxton,4041593704823217,03-12-2001
"
"was  terrifying. He  tucked  them one under  each  armpit, and crushed  them "
"of you - that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, "
Seven are lost  to us  -- if Balin has not found the ring of Thrur which  was 
"all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.' "
strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just  catch  what was said. 'They 
     westward reaching wings of darkness. 
"kicking!""                        "" "
them in the following days. They had crossed the enchanted stream; but beyond it 
"strength of them was  reported  to us  some days ago, marching north. One of "
the sighing wind. 
"meeting,  I  think I shall be off and wish you like the eagles  'farewell wherever you "
"flowers, white and palest green: they glimmered  as a mist amid the rich hue "
"Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him. "
Merry. When  he had looked on the faces of the sick  and seen their hurts he 
"sun,  and  the porch for  a moment grew  dark. All trembled,  and the  Elves "
"     Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward  side of the tree, "
     When  Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag  End announced that  he would shortly be 
"suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. 'You are  a stern lord and resolute,' "
trying to understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that he heard the men 
"Dominik Kainz,4199537524874,12-03-1977
"
"up  at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent down upon him, and "
 
     is wet and cool: 
     Chapter 5   The Ride of the Rohirrim   
"Sophey Puttock,4041370087439,14-02-1995
"
up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? ' 
with black  sails. The West has failed. It is  time for all  to  depart  who 
"Elves, fierce Elves with bright eyes. Take it off us! It hurts us.' "
"     'Why have  they come? Have you heard?' asked Merry. He had now dressed, "
Causeway Forts; but he was ten times outnumbered. 
     They turned out of the lane that ran  between tall houses and the outer  
the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us.' He pointed away 
His  legs ached. He. was  glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually 
To win our harps and gold from him! 
"     from the prey twilight, the forgotten people? "
upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun's disc to the 
"     'No,' said Aragorn. 'The Rohirrim seldom come  here, and it is far from "
"Georgeta Shelford,4854935092953,11-04-1999
"
"     `I can't,' he said. `I  can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't  move "
"     'If  we speak of  poisoned tongues what  shall  we say of  yours, young "
'Ah!'  he said.  'I thought you would come to  that. Weary of  Orthanc? Very 
"edition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. In the meantime "
"winter  flowers  in the  unfading grass:  the  yellow  elanor, and the  pale "
""
"them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if we gets chances. Nice fissh. Nice "
"     His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest; "
The  dwarves  indeed  no  longer  needed  any  urging.  All  were  now  eager  to 
""
""
is under any oath or  command to  seek Mount Doom.  Hard was my parting 
"unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one another; it will "
"see it: the only mallorn  west of the Mountains and east of the Sea, and one "
"     Merry  bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord; "
go no further. Here  let  us hope that the virtue of the Elves will  keep us 
"friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.' "
"Augustin Breeder,4595751399283093,02-08-1995
"
"brigands  drink  in the reek,  and  their brats roll on the floor among  the "
"to your pride,  I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in "
no more. 
"     Sharing  a  wafer of   lembas, and  munching it as  best they could with "
"heavy, Sam.  And  I begin to  see it in my mind  all the time, like a  great "
we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If  we can nurse  our limbs 
"before  Frodo seeming  now  tall beyond  measurement, and  beautiful  beyond "
the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated.  It climbed 
been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?' 
"Bondon Lynd,4904703447770,30-05-1987
"
"     The Elves did not answer at  once, but spoke together  softly  in their "
the night was bitter and miserable. Shelters could be contrived for few (the Master 
""
poor  self.  Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious; and I have searched 
"shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be winding, for  "
anyway Sam might miss Shagrat or be killed by him. He turned quickly and ran 
"gone,' said  Pippin  more hopefully. They turned away and hastened along the "
pierced Gandalf's hat  and stuck there  like a black feather.  Frodo  looked 
with 
"Gondor what  would  you do, Master   Meriadoc, sword-thain though you be, "
"up again he said: 'Now where were we? Yes, of course, g iving presents. Which "
"Some say also  that  Wormtongue was  seen  earlier,  going northward  with a "
ere I  set out to  war. But your road  and our  road  lie  together for many 
breast. Frodo opened his eyes. 
"hurled in ruin; and from far away, now dim, now growing, now mounting to "
     'To Isengard!' the Ents cried in many voices.  
"####-""Well,  it  is  the  first  time  that  even  a  mouse  has  crept  along  carefully  and "
"for  orc-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn's  Wood.  Forty-two he hewed in "
"     'I doubt it  not,' said  Faramir. `If he  were satisfied  of  Aragorn's "
     'I it was who first summoned  the White Council. And  if my designs had 
 
might be. 
like an eye  looking at me.  And  I  am  always  wanting  to put it  on  and 
"####-He  knew  that  something  unexpected  might  happen,  and  he  hardly  dared  to "
"     There lies his crown in water deep, "
water. At last they could go no further without a halt. 
"old Quick Post service,  and keep  special runners at  different points. One "
with 
"Lucien Agneau,4041372421073,03-06-1986
"
"laid himself  on  the table, clasping the palantnr with both hands upon  his "
"     There my heart is;  but  it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the "
     They stooped over the dark water. At first they could see nothing. Then 
"     We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door; "
"hand  save Sauron's ever  held this  thing, ere  it was  lost?  The hand  of "
he was taking them to any more than you do. What is wrong?' 
"dwarves!"" "
lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It would be  wise 
"####-     'If you  would like to hear more. said Merry, 'we will tell you. But it "
"Dore Lambol,4017955170353377,14-04-1990
"
from every side at once. 
"looking up and considering the time and the weather. 'Well, Sam,' he said at "
"     'He stands not  alone,'  said Legolas,  bending his bow and fitting  an "
"Jerrold O'Nion,4154064213516,21-06-1985
"
Merry. 
come for a sudden move.' 
"     It was the sunset-hour, but  the great pall had  now stretched far into "
"Meanwhile  Bard  took  the  lead,  and  ordered  things  as  he  wished,  though "
"returned.  'The scouts  have found naught  to  report beyond  the grey wood, "
"the rainbow on its falls, and the  golden flowers  that floated in its foam. "
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.  
"they stood upon the summit, and looked down into a dark pit: the great cleft  "
spies.  All we could  do would be to go right out  of our way back north  on 
and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its 
them: you cannot quench a terrible thirst by standing under giant oaks and waiting 
"Mariette Anan,4437708074613301,18-10-1997
"
will bring new things.  Above  the reek  it will  be dawn  when you pass the 
but  it  is a strange business: up sprout a  little folk that are not in the 
"     Suddenly as they talked  they were  stricken dumb, frozen as it were to "
"     'Well, come  now!' he said.  'You  have proved mightiest,  and all your "
"mountain-gates, and all that land would be filled with new song and new laughter. "
"names given in his own ancient tongue,  looked up and met her  eyes;  and it "
""
"must, he thought, be many years since Denethor himself had ridden abroad. "
"Christel Farryann,4041377538574,14-10-1980
"
"Hettie Kinder,4041596243599578,17-03-1993
"
"####-course. Gandalf has been here often. Not  that he has told me a  great deal, "
"Boromir  will return to his own city,  where his father and his  people need "
"Mattie MacLachlan,4041593916916023,03-07-1983
"
"watchfulness  of  the land  increase. Tree and stone,  blade  and leaf  were "
"arms, tall as lords, grey-eyed, dark-haired, singing as they came. "
trickling stream flowed among the boulders  at the  bottom. A cliff  frowned 
"hung the darkness,  hollow and  immense,  and  they  were  oppressed by  the "
where the paths are usually open all the winter.' 
"must wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.' "
"white, blushing faintly in  the dawn;  and suddenly the sun climbed over the "
"seemed  as if their glances were like blades  from eye to eye, flickering as "
"####-me with my book, and making a  start  on the next?  Have you  thought of  an "
"     `I am,' said  Aragorn. `And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be reforged "
"that Thjoden has fought a great battle and  that Isengard is overthrown, and "
hope you've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or  have you forgotten 
     Still round the corner there may  wait 
the world  about them than was (or  is)  usual with Big People. According to 
"Corrianne Van Niekerk,4041596054163,08-06-1987
"
""
"     He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and  "
"in  the  cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were "
"moment as  the bearer of the  light` and fixed all her intent upon one prey, "
strode across  the white-paved court.  A  sweet fountain played there in the 
     As  these  dangers  became  more frequent  their  march became  slower.  
"lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low  clouded  sky, and Gollum  seemed "
earth he saw what he was seeking. 
of sight!' 
"you must keep  together  and make  in  the opposite direction. To  the  left  there,  that "
"lies our hope,  where sits our greatest  fear. Doom hangs still on a thread. "
"Emanuele Duesbury,4041371264508,28-06-1990
"
"pass through  Bree, and so  he may not know  what we  are doing. And anyway, "
help you make ready for the journey. Now we will  wish  you all a fair night  
"his thoughts than all the rest of us.  Who you are; how  you came there, and "
"     He drew a deep breath. 'Well, I'm back,' he said. "
"     'Then there was a bit  of trouble,  but not  enough. Old Will the Mayor  "
 
"Remington Crellin,4041376806246,16-08-1983
"
"Coralyn Gilstoun,4041597548940,06-08-1982
"
"""But what brought you into the forest at all?"" asked the king angrily.  "
"Fornost,' said Aragorn: "
"many  other  fair things that  he had possessed,  and over him was raised  a  "
"him  quiet,  as  small  spiders  do  to  flies-until he  remembered his  sword  and drew  it "
said. We lost them and we cannot find them.' He sighed. 'I thought most folk  
either way. We have already lost precious hours.' 
"     His  thought turned to the Ring, but there was  no  comfort there, only "
interest.  
There  was  no  thought  of  a  fight.  Even  if  the  dwarves  had  not  been  in  such  a 
"as you can,' he said. 'I wish I could carry you. You aren't fit to walk  any "
     At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind him and 
It was indeed a much wider land from the ford to the mountains than ever you 
does he then know of your burden? ' 
"     'No indeed!' she answered, and her smile faded. 'That would indeed be a "
     The  Elves next unwrapped  and gave to each  of the Company the clothes 
"the  black  fellows be off, and  slammed the door on them; but they've  been "
he had misjudged the distance. 
"there in the fog. Gandalf was speaking  to the men that  barred his way, and "
"     'I'm sure it is,' said Frodo. 'But  we can't go  any quicker, if we are "
"Marta Higginbottam,4041374948008,05-05-1975
"
"with an effort he turned back, and as  he did so, he felt the Ring resisting "
"     Frodo fell  forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once "
"     'I daresay,' said Frodo. `But what he means  to  do is another matter.' "
get there.' 
"own,' he said. 'It is as plain as my  nose that no  accident brought you and "
living tree  with branches laced  and drooping to the ground; his bed was of 
while; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts.' 
my  part to choose for you; but I will help you as  I  may.  There are  some 
"if you do  not  like being here, you can remember  that  you  brought it  on "
"Ingmar le Keux,4017955643509449,14-09-1977
"
East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack of thunder right  
"Eal Lidgard,4695080086812561,04-10-1986
"
"gave  to  Mortal Men,  proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago  they "
"back in the  Smials at Tuckborough:  a huge place,  where  the furniture has "
"Lorry Frosch,4017955320304,10-08-1993
"
     Chapter 6   The Battle of the Pelennor Fields  
"Nazgyl  down below are, by your account; and Lugb®rz is too. Something "
"     'I  would,'  said  Faramir. And he took her in his arms and  kissed her  "
     'Of course you mustn't vanish!' said Gandalf. 'That wouldn't do at all! 
"     THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418. "
"He paused for  a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stopped whimpering. "
     'But what has  one of the Big  People got  to do with us?' said Pippin. 
"stammering. `Nothing, unless it might be-unless it is permitted to ask. nay, "
"     Frodo  dozed, though the  pain  of his wound was slowly growing,  and a  "
"Amid  shrieks  and  wailing  and  the  shouts  of  men  he  came  over  them,  swept "
     / don't know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less 
"We'll be nice to them, very nice, if they'll be  nice to  us, won't we, yes, "
"Since  it did not  fall down again,  they saw  that  it must have stuck in the branches. "
"""It  said  so, yes; but  it's  tricksy.  It doesn't  say what  it means.  It won't  say what "
it swiftly and without great rumour.' 
"     'Not a sound but the wind,' he  said. `There are no goblins near, or my "
"will  face the next task. Meanwhile your people tha t are left, the women and "
named 
"sprang lightly  upon Arod's back.  'Whether they  fled  at first in fear, or "
"his  eyes  palely  shining  even  from  behind.  Painfully  he  got  up,  and  sheathed  his "
"     `Sneaking,' said Gollum, and the green glint did not leave his  eyes. "
its eyes that blinked at the moon  for a moment and then were quickly lidded  
     So hand the old bone over!'  
"changed my house, my chair,  and my college,  and the days though  less dark "
"####-     Sam  struggled with himself, arguing this  way and that. `He may be a ll "
"other things;  and  all its great  stronghold, gate on  gate,  and tower  on "
"     And  when  the glad shout had swelled up and died away  again, to Sam's "
####-your camp. Do you good. Don't you know we're at war?' 
"Concordia Coll,4041596183169309,30-12-1979
"
"fields, built our houses, wrought  our tools, or ridden away to help in  the "
them. The passage  they  had  chosen wound steadily upwards. As  far as they 
dwarves) and had also been packed more neatly with plenty of  straw  into  smaller 
"was  well,  until  one  day  they  met  a  thunderstorm  -  more  than  a  thunderstorm,  a "
"     'But my home, such  as I have, is in the  North. For  here the heirs of "
     With that the servant of the  Prince came and led them to the Houses of 
 
cliff-wall we are under now.' 
understand his peril.  Foolishly he  decided to  fight. It  would be easy to 
""
"against so many. Take us to your master!"" "
soon  and begin to rain and blow again. And there was still a very long  way 
"and follow Frodo, or else to follow  the Orcs on foot. There is little  hope "
"had turned up again, and where they had all got to now.  "
"Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer, "
"     'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf:  "
"Frodo. 'Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.' "
no more. Drawing  his bright sword and crying Elendil!  Elendil!  he crashed 
"in the north door. If we cou ld find a window it would help,  but I fear that "
breast in silver with the token of the Tree. His old clothes were folded and 
"they be, living few and  secretly, wild and wary as the beasts. They go  not "
companies were mustering; many already were marching down to the Gate. 
land of the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight 
"Hussein O'Cullen,4041596308536,12-12-1979
"
"     They picked a  way  among the trees, and  their  ponies plodded  along, "
"the  Men of Gondor, last memory  of Westernesse, that had passed through the "
"Elmer Gatheridge,4041373412832,06-08-1981
"
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But 
     in the Mounds of Mundburg under mould they lie  
""
"a fine night,'  he  said  aloud.  'That's good for a beginning.  I feel like "
"     Aragorn looked  at  him with  kindly  pity. `Very  well,  Frodo  son of "
wear them? ' 
"     `Well, so we meet and  part,  Frodo son of Drogo. You have no  need  of "
"took a deep breath;  then he laughed, and passed inside. A great stone table "
"of five hundred emeralds green as grass, which he gave for the arming of his eldest "
"Frodo, there's other things we might do without. Why not lighten  the load a  "
rules the Rohirrim. Who shall rule the City meanwhile? Shall we not send now 
the bottom in this light. What if you comes to a place where there's nowhere 
Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days.  
"the hobbits.  'A song! A song!' shouted all the others.  'Come on now, master, "
####-debates disturbed  his mind.  He knew all the arguments of despair and would 
"Mayer Vice,4041592428650,18-04-2001
"
There was a howl of anger and surprise from the goblins. Loud cried the Lord 
Frodo.  He comes  of  age  and into his inheritance today. Some  perfunctory 
"By caves where never sun has shone, "
"and  Autumn,  out  of their own  lands away  beyond the  Tower Hills.  I  am "
"####-     'No,  don't give  the  ring  to  me,'  said  Gandalf. 'Put  it  on  the "
"that you won't be away very long, not more than a fortnight; and you'll come  "
view  to  the North. Soon  they could see  the  lands before  the Mountain's  feet black 
standing in thought before the door of the Houses when they came out. 
me.' 
merely  grumbling.  They  knew  only  too  well  that  they  would  soon  all  have  been 
"the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's  Deep, after a hero of old wars "
"     the flowers may rise in Spring, "
"burglar' indeed! Well, we'll hear no more of that."" "
"Nessie Killick,4712342756273,14-03-1992
"
"     'Nay,  he did not come to the Rock,'  said one  of the Westfold-men,  'I "
"the Shadow  to  the fire,  and died in splendour, even as the Sun, returning "
Lake. 
     When winter first begins to bite  
begins. 
 
     The Road goes ever on and on  
     Gimli  rose and  planted  his feet  firmly apart: his hand gripped  the 
the days of the Last Alliance.' 
"that awaits him.  However that may be, the Captain of Despair does not press "
"his bow. 'Keep these well,' he said, 'for they come from the Golden Wood and "
"     Frodo crawled to  the edge of the road and watched the rider,  until he "
"evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but there "
"Skylar Bruneau,4041378693717,16-02-1978
"
things go on the wall!' 
captain of  his  people when  his time came. But we have had no word of this 
"gel out a small waggon,  and I'll drive you all to the Ferry. That will save "
"Wandie Stoile,4041591054907465,09-04-1994
"
"     'That is grievous,' she said. 'And yet  it  is  good beyond all  that I "
"feint,' said Aragorn; 'and its chief purpose, I  deem, was  rather to draw us "
"     `Yes, yes,' said Gollum. `All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and Orcs.  "
"he took the cup, his hand  met hers,  and he knew  that she trembled at  the "
"down into Brandywine. If they want to make the Shire into a desert,  they're "
"     `But in any  case we cannot take the poor  beast  into the Mines,' said "
"than we guessed. But that is the spirit of Mordor, Sam; and it has spread to "
     And doom fell on Tin®viel 
lines  of marching Orcs; and troops  of  them mounted on  great wolves.  And 
"     'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!' "
"the  lesser stars. But low  in the South one star shone red. Every night, as "
"""O  let  'em all come! Hurry up! Come along, you  two, and sit down! But  look "
"####-     'Nay, Galadriel,' said  Legolas. 'Did she not speak  through Gandalf of "
"servants of the Nameless. Some of your Company, I guess, live still. "
"     'No one,' said Gimli. 'And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it. "
"     'That  is true,'  said Aragorn. 'But if I  read  the signs back  yonder  "
"Haywood Guyon,4041591427836,26-09-1979
"
down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. `There we 
"Mela Lytlle,4041373858570,24-03-1986
"
Mountains to the land beyond. 
     Boromir  stepped  out of the  circle and stared up into  the blackness.  
"Norma Jacques,4564104215224,07-10-1988
"
"Tamarah Caygill,4041379451180,11-08-1996
"
here. You must form your own ideas.' 
they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses  were not 
and exposed them  for  a dreadful  moment  to view from  the Tower. As  they 
"living and written. But  since they were little used by Frodo, being  almost  "
     At the door he turned to one  of the servants who had remained on guard 
Would that this thing had come to me!' 
""
"Bernadette Juckes,4371517036472,20-08-1976
"
"This  hobbit  was  a  very  well-to-do  hobbit,  and  his  name  was  Baggins.  The "
"dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it seemed to him "
"couldn't swear to  it, but it  looked to me as if two men was  stooping over  "
"####-was a flower -garden and a clipped  hedge silver -netted, and beyond that grey "
"foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.' "
"Sanson Nevitt,4017953992757,13-07-1982
"
"fled before them. Thorin wielded his axe with mighty strokes, and nothing seemed "
respect little Bilbo. Now he had become the real leader in their adventure. He had 
"being the older and the hardier (both true), and he would not be stayed. "
"bank  it  stumbled.  The  shadows  swallowed  it  up,  but  they  heard  the  sound  of "
supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.' 
Gandalf  and his  friends. The Wargs were  angry  and puzzled  at  finding  them here 
"where  he  was  at  all,  nor  why  he  felt  so  hungry;  for  he  had  forgotten  everything "
"passed  by the  company they came  to the hobbits, and Saruman  stopped  and "
they were taller and slimmer than the others; they were lovers of  trees and 
any gifts that I could give to match with  your deeds you  should have them;  
"Dun Tippell,4041379989593,18-07-1998
"
"     'Then  he gloated over me. I felt  I was  falling  to pieces. No, no! I "
"Mandi Fredi,4811547028247,24-02-1986
"
     `Of course not!  ' said Gandalf.  'Who would? But  the question is: who 
perceive  the three strangers sitting silently and  watching them. The  host  
"     'Hoom, well, that is fair enough,' said Treebeard; 'for to be sure Ents "
"Gonzales Buston,4041596163768005,02-10-1996
"
"cellar  or  store-house, I suppose. When we opened them, we found they  were "
see us off.' 
"tough in the fibre, I deem.' "
"     'Did you see anything?' asked Frodo, springing to his feet. "
are you going?' 
     He guessed that  even in Elrond's house the matter of  the Ring was not 
roared with laughter.  'Don't  be absurd!' said Frodo.  'I am  going where I 
time we began to climb up again.' 
writhed and withered and was consumed. 
gems an image of a tree  in flower. But the throne was empty. At the foot of 
"then  came Glorfindel  and Erestor  and  all the household of Rivendell, and  "
"suddenly  light  streamed  in,  real  light, the plain light of  day.  A low "
ringing 
"stern as the mountains.  But I cannot guess what it  means, save  that it is "
"     `It would be a big jump still,' said Frodo. `About, well'  --  he  stood "
east  and  then north; but at  the last it  turned away  and  went  straight 
"amazement. `These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, `the most evil that have "
"The wind came down from mountains cold, "
again to scan some print or mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped 
"Maressa Gillions,4017953380516,27-11-1981
"
 
####-It was  just  then  that Gandalf  came  back. But  no  one  saw  him. The  trolls  had 
"Tootsie Dominetti,4041374552546790,25-11-1998
"
to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts! ' 
"     'No,  I  caught 'em trespassing,'  said the farmer, 'and nearly set  my "
"Filmore Alp,4605379704659993,22-12-1996
"
dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and  the middle-night has 
only green mounds in the grassy hills. 
circle  was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands  could 
"The  last  thing  that  he  remembered  was  the  party  at  the  hobbit's  house,  and  they "
"     `The birds again!' said Aragorn, pointing down. "
"wizard Gandalf) may never return. It is a solemn moment. Our object is, I take it, "
its light fell on the astonished face of the farmer. 
     'Why doesn't Gandalf do something quick? ' said Pippin. 
Gimli Gluin's son who had walked unafraid in many deep places of the world. 
     A sudden tree or standing stone 
"Sherye Heyfield,4251201566248003,06-06-1996
"
slowly. 'We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heart 
     'You  must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return. 
In  the  meanwhile  some  of  them  explored  the  ledge  beyond  the  opening  and 
nearer; and the Black Riders began  to seem  like phantoms of  the woods now 
"their chins. No Har foot  or Fallohide had  any trace of a beard. Indeed, the "
"making  it  all  up,  of  course,  but  you  deserve  a  supper  for  the  story  all  the  same. "
"Ahmed Sapir,4041376451720,30-03-1999
"
####-wall at their right hand. They  could see very little. Great black shapeless 
"Madelle Kamena,4017959920002250,06-03-1979
"
The old Master had come to a bad end. Bard had given him much gold for the 
rock-face. 
""
"     It did not, however, turn  out half as bad as he had expected. The rope "
"full of grief, and  afraid. But I have a deed to do, or to attempt, before I "
guests  were sitting  down and eating together. At  other  times  there were 
"tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are ju st trees, of course; but "
     'Mithrandir  was  lost!  '  said Faramir.  'An  evil fate seems to have 
"away. The onlookers stood silent for a while. Dust hung  in the air, for the "
and a white  light shone forth like a sword in that black  place. Before his 
queens of great renown.' 
right.' 
you not accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's return? If 
"Johnny Paolone,4017952169443236,20-03-1989
"
"Orcs, and  they carry  off what they can, choosing always the  black horses: "
"that opened unexpectedly before them, and there he lay like a dead thing. "
"has  come  to new  wisdom, then with all  his servants  you will be in great "
them  still  with  a  long  and  difficult  northward  march  when  they  got  to  the  other 
"after  all  to  think  that  they  had  all  gone  without  him,  and  without  bothering  to "
he quailed again. 
backwards  and fell  over Merry's  prostrate  form with  a  curse. Yet  that 
sunlight.  Then one of the guards stepped forward  and  spoke in  the Common 
make things greater than they should be. So perhaps it may have been no more 
"Rikki Jeffry,4017953396207,01-03-1981
"
""
""
"listening;  but all  was now silent, and  at last he turned and fell  asleep "
"mountains, until he could go no further.  At the bottom  of the tunnel lay a  "
could not get through. 
would  be  very  dangerous. We  must  go  and  find  him;  and  if  all  goes  well  at  our 
free. There is  such a thing as malice and revenge.' 
"lo! the mantle and hauberk were empty. Shapeless they lay now on the ground, "
as I asked; but it was impassable.' 
     When  at length  all the Company was gathered on the  east  bank of the 
"them. Slow, because they do not count the running years, not for themselves. "
 
And so they came at last deep into the glen; and there stood a sheer wall of 
for Gimli the Dwarf you  would have been lost  then. But at least I know now 
you.  But let  me  think!  Last time I looked  I'd got about enough of  that 
"not made by Saruman, but by the Men of N®menor long ago; and it is very tall "
do something to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber of 
"challenge, and they drew together, since it was but waste of men to send out "
until he had in fact apparently settled down immovably.  
steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as  he went on:  most of all because he knew 
"shall fight you!"" They meant to push on between the Mountain and the loop of the "
     He drank from yet untasted wells; 
"behaved even  to  their worst enemies, when  they captured  them. The giant  spiders "
"Entwives are only a memory for us, and our  beards  are  long and  grey. The "
after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman 
and a cluster of stone huts set about the dark mouth of a cave. There was no  
"one arrow,'  he said; 'and Boromir was pierced by  many. When last I saw him "
"writhing, tangled brambles sprawled. Some  had  long stabbing  thorns,  some "
tassel. It was some time before he would be even polite to the hobbit. 
"Boniface Langford,4676221785762,10-01-2000
"
"endured, though reduced in  size; this  was at Bree and in the Chetwood that "
"of his speed. The two others followed, now  far behind. As soon as Shadowfax "
""
Firstborn roamed while Men still slept. Yet Fangorn holds some secret of its 
"a package. 'One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.' "
about him. Elfhelm's  jored came  next; and now Merry noticed  that  Dernhelm 
"     his staff was broken on the stone, "
"say,' answered Hirgon. 'But indeed our  case is desperate. My  lord does not  "
water far away. 
of them were hustling back the way they had come. 
"would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit  here quietly by the fire  for  a bit, and "
"fat melts, and bones black "
longer.  
"face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat "
"whence we wandered in ages long ago,' said Legolas, 'but we hear that Lurien "
"not go on much longer, he wakened Frodo gently. "
"Darice Easby,4110220526084390,30-10-1987
"
seem  to us more  urgent  than  hunting  for  you. Say rather  that  you are 
"""That  was  no  fish!""  one  said.  ""There  is  a  spy  about.  Hide  your  lights! They "
"     Seldom have walked the feet of Men, "
     Frodo was  crushed by the news. How  could they hope to reach Rivendell 
others deal  with these irksome guests. Your meat is  about to be set on the 
`Why  has nothing  of  this  been  told  to me before?  '  he  asked in  the 
peace.' 
"if master will go this way. So Smjagol must save them both, and he thinks of "
Chapter 2. The Passing of the Grey Company 
"cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for  Saruman! It was his downfall,  as  I now "
"Lorene Speak,4041372730996770,30-10-1982
"
"     'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,'  he "
brought to Faramir and he washed. 
"Malorie Infante,4041371702165844,13-02-1997
"
from 'down under Hill'. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of 
turf. 
     Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel; and the Lady said to 
"The  return  of  Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins  created  quite  a  disturbance,  both  under  the "
"frail grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then he "
"the silver and sable of the Guards  of Minas Tirith, and the other  in white "
"looked at him. And there they stand to this day,  all alone, unless the birds perch on "
"Humfrey Carolan,4017954607943397,06-10-1999
"
its eyes and in its nostrils there burned a flame. The  rider was robed  all 
one  thing: breaking Isengard.  But they will  start  thinking  again before 
"Their  spirits  had  risen  a  little  at  the  discovery  of  the path, but now  they  sank "
     4.  
"forth on the  second  morning from that day with  seven thousands, if  these "
"secrecy. Had  I a host of Elves  in armour of the Elder Days, it would avail "
""
"if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.' 'Speak not so!' she "
"day, Merry had ridden  by himself just behind the  king, saying nothing, and "
"But  you need  ask  no  questions.  And if I'm  not with him, he  may  be in  "
"     'He's mine,' said  Tom. 'My four-legged  friend;  though I seldom  ride "
to deal with at Helm's  Deep. It seems plain  now that that Southerner was a  
"Krissie Barrs,4017952008697273,12-02-2000
"
hillmen swarmed about  its feet from end  to end. Ropes with grappling hooks 
"nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he burst out: 'Your  "
     At  last Frodo  could  go  no further.  They had  climbed  up  a narrow 
"     Tin®viel the elven-fair, "
"are old swords, very old swords of the High Elves of the West, my kin. They were "
knew  it in my heart. May  I be forgiven!  Now I've got to get  back to him. 
""
"spoke in  the trouble of  my heart. I will do what I  can  to aid you,  each "
"Kariotta Reucastle,4017952222259702,22-02-1987
"
over them for the faces and voices of their companions. especially for Frodo 
"     Seven for the Dwarf- lords in their halls of stone, "
"At least his hand  still clasped  the Red Arrow, but his head was  hewn off. "
"While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of  the bed, and nibbling small "
"the living rock of Zirak-zigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine. "
"     'Now is the hour come, Riders of the Mark, sons  of Eorl! Foes and fire "
"bridge.  'Elendil!' he shouted. 'I am with you, Gandalf! ' "
"have guessed  it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said.  'And  the "
"sound,  startling and horrible in  the  heavy  padded  silence: a  gurgling, "
"would  be  left at  the  Gamgees' in Bagshot Row.  She  snorted, and  showed "
"Tirith will fall,  if the Ring lasts. But why?  Certainly, if the  Ring were "
standing there to greet them as they went by. But there was no sign  of him; 
"     'Surely  this  is a troll-hole, if ever there  was one!'  said  Pippin. "
"parties, about dragons and goblins and giants and  the rescue of princesses and  the "
"Dain has crowned their chief with gold, and sworn friendship with them for ever."" "
"white cloud borne  on  the  stiffening breeze from  the East,  that  was now "
veils  were become  that still warded  it  off. Frodo  knew just  where  the 
"Pierrette Deary,4041597195155427,30-07-1999
"
before him.  A noise of tramping feet and harsh shouts:  Orcs were coming up 
"Hirsch Kighly,4041598065072056,24-10-1983
"
"     'I was thinking so,' said Frodo. 'But we have got to try and get there; "
thongs. 
paddled  to  the  bank;  Bilbo  could  see  his  eyes  coming  towards  him.  His  tongue 
     is a  mountain; 
     Frodo's legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his head 
"     Suddenly a  song began: a cold  murmur, rising and  falling.  The voice "
"be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We "
"and had not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things that "
going  was slow and  cautious.  How  many hours  had  passed  since they had 
"     'Sam!' cried  Frodo,  feeling that amazement could  go no  further, and "
     'Rohan? Rohan did you say?  That is  a glad word.  We seek that land in 
     Then  Aragorn  recounted  all  that  had  happened  upon  the  pass  of 
####-Taur-na-neldor! 
"night; but still there would be some five hundred more  to go  with the king, "
Chapter 8. Farewell to Lurien 
     `Will  he?'  said Sam. 'You're  forgetting the great big elvish warrior  
in his song of the Mounds of Mundburg: 
and a hatchet. 
"growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once  began to  "
empty halls and images of men long dead;  and they entered into the House of 
a wide  circle of  lawn surrounded by  a belt of  low trees inside the outer  
"cared for towers, or  rings, or  anything devised by mind  or hand, who only  "
"     'Not  another letter  you've forgotten. I hope,  Mr.  Butterbur?'  said "
"Ulysses Skitch,4977139533500812,09-07-1983
"
"     'Fissh, nice fissh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last, yes.  "
"     `Sh, Gorbag!'  Shagrat's voice  was  lowered, so  tha t  even  with  his "
pointed shadows that went on before them. Darkness had already crept beneath 
     'I know - and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What can I 
     For the  fashion  of  Minas Tirith was such that it was built on  seven 
     'Hobbits?'  said Thjoden. 'Your  tongue is  strangely changed; but  the 
"it in your mug; or straight from the pan, when it's  cooled a bit. I haven't  "
the  hut  as  if  they  expected  the  Mountain  to  go  golden  in  the  night  and  all  the 
sent  no  word. But come! All such matters must wait. You find us riding  in 
"     'Nay!' said Thjoden.  'In  the dark hour  before dawn I doubted, but we "
"""Both  wrong,""  cried  Bilbo  very much  relieved;  and  he  jumped  at  once  to  his "
"     Sam had no time  to think. He might have slipped out of the other door, "
riverside; but Bilbo escaped  into  the woods carrying a  loaf and a  leather bottle of 
Dwarf?' 
"your  staff is broken.' There was  a  crack, and the staff  split asunder in "
down the corridor.  There was a  ring and clatter  as the Company drew their 
"Edgardo De la Harpe,4041595960774943,15-04-1981
"
"     'This  is the house of  Thjoden, not of Aragorn, even  were  he King of "
"watched,   until there came out of the gathering mist a flash; and  then they "
"     'Yes, I remember. And I wondered  how you knew,' said Frodo. 'Well come "
"is  nothing  to the old feeling of  this  wood.  Look at  all those weeping, "
"Drucy Donke,4623261068071,04-11-1979
"
"old  noser, you don't like our  food,  and I'd  not  be sorry  for  a change "
have  set  out; and then far more grievous would the  evils of this day have 
Captain: he can master both beasts and men. Ah! there one of the foul things 
"Nari Cramer,4017957395882,18-06-1989
"
"the table, and drew chairs round the fire. "
"in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than most Men, from "
and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard. 
"come to the end of a long cutting, deep, and sheer -sided in  the middle,  by "
wolves  were howling on  the wood's borders: but  on  the land  of Lurien no 
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent. 
"     `Rope!'  cried  Sam, talking wildly to himself  in  his  excitement and "
     o menel aglar elenath! 
fair and terrible came even to the City. 
"Blaine Allot,4471243579983,22-01-1995
"
"thing  to  miss,  in  June  under  the  stars,  not  if  you  care  for  such  things.  Also  he "
"Chaunce Oldroyde,4813076293489513,12-12-1978
"
"     'Did  you hear a whistle, and  what sounded like an answer? ' he asked. "
"####-     `Behold Tol Brandir! ' said Aragorn,  pointing south to  the tall peak. "
"Ignacio Gothliff,4041379619190,04-05-1976
"
"     'They may suffer me  to pass,' said Aragorn; 'but at the  least I  will "
"the  night deepens.  Upon the hill-top stood Gandalf,  and  he was white and "
"himself and began pawing at Frodo, fawning at his knees. "
"being  magical  (and  also  untouched  by  the  dragon,  who  had  small  interests  in "
none had observed sprang out of the shadows  and gave a hoarse  shout: Baruk 
"then quickly his voice changed.  'No, no,  Sam,' he said sadly.  'But you must  "
"Theobald Van Leijs,4041379772478,09-01-1982
"
"Girion, Lord of Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down  the Running River "
So  they  all  went  to  breakfast  with  him.  Beorn  was  most  jolly  for  a  change; 
to a clamour of many voices crying strange news  in the dawn.  The Orcs upon 
malicious  uses.  He became  sharp-eyed and  keen-eared  for  all  that  was 
"     Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that "
gem that hung on a chain about his neck and he seemed half in a dream. 
But I come here now and again.' 
of the Dead.' 
""
"son of Drogo is my name, and with  me is  Samwise son  of Hamfast, a  worthy "
"Allison Sarsfield,4041590020665355,20-07-1984
"
paved  with  stones  of  many  hues;  branching  runes  and strange  devices 
"their tools to this Mountain on the map. It had been discovered by my far ancestor, "
"     The  Mountain crept  up ever nearer, until, if they  lifted their heavy "
"     At that a  window slammed, and a crowd  of hobbits with lanterns poured  "
"     Maggot got down and took a good look  either way, north and  south, but "
"over his mail), crumpled and much folded, Thorin's letter that had been put under "
"whisker  at  it.  So,  naturally,  he  got  right  up  to  the  fire-for  fire  it  was  without "
"But if I had seen you,  before I heard your voices-I liked them: nice little "
"deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.' "
Just  then  all  the  others  came  round  the  corner  of  the  road  from  the  village. 
longer on this side of the  River:  only he can have taken the boat. And Sam 
"at a horrible risk. ""Answers were to be guessed not given,"" he said. "
the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass.  
"     The shadows  of  the trees  were long and  thin  on the  grass, as they "
"coals, and  his tongue  was red; he wielded a great  spear. With a thrust of "
like a dream that has slowly faded.' 
####-     `Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel! ' said Aragorn sternly. 'You know 
"find  only  ruined  walls  in  seven  days  from  now,   unless  other  help "
"in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, and Minas Tirith in "
was a track that  left the main Morgul-road at the  western  bridge-end  and 
heads. He ran to the other side and looked over the brink into a dark pit of 
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings 
"herdsmen had wandered much, living  in  camp  and tent, even in winter -time. "
places to live in among the more pleasant woods in the valleys and along the river-
"ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought  of words that might  "
"back, and he  saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and  "
go away. But  the old man did not move. He stood  leaning on his stick and gazing 
"Willy Dumingo,4041594372342498,30-10-1988
"
"""I would give a good many of  these precious goblets,    thought, ""for a drink of "
"the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only  "
"Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think about, and they asked no more "
and fretted.  . 
"Corbin Pinnijar,4017950782086,10-01-1988
"
"####-doubt that you will find  what you seek, or accomplish what  you intend,  or  "
flapping and tugging the flags and white standards of the citadel. Away down 
' he called.  'Master!'.  
"mastery: for the Spear  of  Gil-galad and the  Sword of Elendil, Aiglos  and "
"they rode  at leisure,  and often they lingered in the fair  woodlands where "
pass under its great arch he felt a  shock: as if  he had run into some  web 
"Franklin Richie,4537453681883554,12-09-1998
"
"opening,  and his  eyes gleamed  cold  in his head,  as he  swayed  it  from  side  to  side "
"three passages,'  said Gimli. `That hole was plainly a  well for the guards' "
"Here, take this elven-cake, and  drink that last drop in  your  bottle!  The "
"Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but "
"nigh Bree  now from Outside,'  he said. 'And the inside  folks, they stay at "
"Katharina Cooley,4041373326772955,26-11-1981
"
have given the ring to him. It had  previously turned up  just so as to be a  
"Zonnya Attoe,4041591392767142,03-05-1993
"
"he walk? And if his arms were tied, how did he use the knife? And if neither  "
"lived,  not  even the  leprous growths that feed on rottenness. The  gasping "
"eager now to see the  Shire again; but at first they  rode  only slowly, for  "
"     There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it "
"     a trumpet-voice, a burning brand, "
     upon his breast an emerald. 
"####-""Don't dip your beard in the foam, father!"" they cried to Thorin, who was bent "
river. 
     'Yet now under the Lord of Barad-dyr the most  fell of all his captains 
"     They put him  in a large chair by the wood-fire, and Gandalf sat on the "
"until it towered up high above them, shutting  out the view of all that  lay "
"companions. He  used the ring many times on his  quest, chiefly for the help "
"more  heed to  the battle.  He was weary and  full  of  pain, and  his limbs "
"on  the  move,  looking for   lands  where they  could  find some  peace. The "
"     'What  about the  autumn, on  or after  Our Birthday?' asked  Frodo. 'I  "
on  the  Mountain  creaking  and  cracking  in  the  wind.  Some  of  the  dwarves  who 
"on  the hill.  At the bottom, upon a  low  pedestal  carved like a branching "
"Talyah Bambury,4041373771872,30-11-1983
"
"baggages  and  packages  lying  broken  open,  and  being  rummaged  by  goblins,  and "
large signboard: a  fat white pony reared up on  its hind legs. Over the door 
"and among the elves, talking merrily with them. "
westwards.  
"Daphna Trafford,4041590349528,12-04-1992
"
is ever on  the Ring.  Was  it  present in the battle? Was it found? What if 
"Xever McLise,4365346907562951,03-08-1983
"
"     Then he held out his hands to  them, and they  saw that one shone  with "
"his friends just in time to scuttle over at the heels of the fast elves, before the great "
     The ostler has a tipsy cat 
"was not Gandalf at all. It was a dwarf with a blue beard tucked into a golden belt, "
shoot the first Orc that should dare to approach the stair. 
"stair's past. Clever hobbits to  climb so high, very  clever hobbits. Just a  "
of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion  among  the trees  near 
     The  hobbits   shuddered.   Even  in  the   Shire  the  rumour  of  the 
"Cecil Lorman,4017957014795276,03-10-1979
"
"all the Eagles of  the North, mightiest of the descendants of old Thorondor, "
     'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country ' said 
"     'I  am a  messenger of  the  King,' he  said. 'You are speaking  to the "
""
"Sydelle Yakubovich,4644748148156696,31-08-1996
"
and  the snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir found it hard to 
us 
together. 
"courage to leave the safety  of these stone walls. He lay  motionless, still "
"return  with  the horses over the  Entwade  to Meduseld,  the high house  in "
""
"     `I can't abide fog,' said  Sam; `but this  seems to be a lucky one. Now "
"thought he  was going to  stab me, but he threw the  things away as if  they "
     A wind by night in Northern lands 
coming! 
"cape,  tippet, muff, nor any other such unfortunate word! He  is a skin-changer. He "
"     'Indeed no!  Ents will see to that,' said Treebeard. 'Saruman shall not "
"sign  on  the  door,  I  should  have  been  sure  we  had  come  to  the  wrong  house.  As "
"     The hemlock-umbels tall and fair, "
 
"floor, while  far  up  in  the  tunnel  the  dwarves  huddled  together  and  imagined  that "
"Bilbo  blinked,  and  then  suddenly  he  saw  the  goblins:  goblins  in  full  armour "
"They  were  too  eager  to  trouble  about  the  runes  or  the  moon-letters,  but  tried "
     In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural 
"Avis Healey,4041590828378615,07-04-1980
"
that glittered in  the sunlight. It  looked  like  the new-opened leaf of  a  
They  had ridden for  some four  hours from  the branching of the roads when 
"take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can't turn back. It isn't  "
wolves  that  had  caught  fire  and  fled  into  the  forest  had  set  it  alight  in  several 
sudden  trill. There was a  loud attack. A  flake of  rock split  from  the wall and  fell. 
"of  the  kitchen,  and  Fili  and Kili  behind  them,  and  before  he  could  say  knife  they "
"gloom, brooded the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg. "
"bottom of the pack in a flat wooden box a dwindling treasure, some salt. But "
     `It is getting hot! ' he  gasped. `We ought to  be down at least to the 
large  flat  ferry-boat was  moored beside it.  The white  bollards near the 
"     `Indeed it is,' said Gimli.  'Why it is better than  the honey-cakes of "
"     At length they came to the door upon the outer court, and they  halted. "
"Deni Andrag,4017950709229917,02-05-1975
"
gloom  that  hung over the distant eastern sky;  and little  hope at all was 
"said, `and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. "
hand with  his right. 
"of some air less heavy, and then they passed it by. "
"to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron's creatures; and  it  is "
"Aridatha Avramov,4041371221495094,18-01-1983
"
"shaggy as an old dog and as lean as a clothes-rail, but it  was alive. Nob's "
but  it  was not long before he  learned at least what was meant by  Ernil i 
"Well, it's fifteen mile each way. We needn't trouble about them just yet.' "
knife-work up here.' 
"     'I  don't know  what has  come  over  you, Gandalf,' he said. 'You have "
my  gift well. The Shire shall now be  more than ever blessed  and beloved.' 
"affair at the  Ford, as I  keep on asking,  and I shall be  content  for the "
eastern  archway through a shaft near  the roof came  a long pale gleam; and 
"wanted for  the  War,  some   elvish plot  or other.  Anyway they'll both  be "
really  first-class  and  legendary  burglar would  at  this  point  have  picked  the  trolls' 
"riddle,' answered Boromir proudly. `Yet we are hard  pressed, and  the Sword "
"wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in "
"     `Yrch!' said Legolas, falling into his own tongue. "
must have been  a mile high. In the evening there  was a great rainbow  over  
lapped in the water a warrior lay asleep. 
"Frodo and Sam. They were not forgotten. But they were far beyond aid, and no "
"Isildur's Bane. You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.' "
"Israel Shinfield,4041378260496578,12-12-1978
"
"lending  them, and bidding him many  farewells  they  rode off  through his gate at a "
"Buffy Linscott,4041376925131325,23-01-1992
"
""
began to sing. 
"heart of dazzling light, as though Edrendil  had himself come down  from the "
"know him come to love him after his own fashion,  even the cold maiden of the "
has a better head for that sort of thing.' 
"passed  by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty  roots  through  the "
of Orcs; and I do not hunt them in this fashion out of choice. The Orcs whom 
this racket. Early last  night we  saw him. Anyway my lads reported that Her  
"     'But  I say to thee, Gandalf Mithrandir, I will not  be  thy tool! I am "
     When they caught his  words again  they found that he had  now wandered 
"Caradhras, and in  the  days that followed;  and  he spoke  of Balin and his "
"Kacie Lote,4041374340243692,11-02-1975
"
"pale lids. A  very miserable creature he looked, dripping and dank, smelling  "
"if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. 'Just this: you must take me along with you, "
"####-well that I  did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, and  haste "
     Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black  branches  of  Winter upon 
ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.' 
"himself  or for  others,' said Aragorn. 'There are some  things that  it  is "
"the  whisper of dark trees, the crack of stone, and the vast waiting silence "
did not relish it. At the first signs  of day  they halted  again.  They had 
""
"     But old O liphaunt am I, "
do you  know that the caverns of Helm's Deep  are vast and beautiful?  There 
"drawn  as if with pain, and  his hands clenched the arms of  his  chair. The "
like swarming flies.  Vainly they crawled and clambered about  the walls  of 
     Chapter 7   In the House of Tom Bombadil   
"get on!' said Merry,  and after that  the  travellers  saw  to it that their "
before it  was  shut;  and as they  reached the Lampwrights'  Street all the 
"Twilight, "
"panting and calling, Frodo! "
"and then with a wild light of madness glaring in his eyes come,  swiftly but "
     There was a silence. The old  man  did not move in his chair. At length 
Chapter 8. Fog on the Barrow-Downs 
"     there were clearly  the beginnings of  a  path, that climbed  with many "
and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!' 
"     Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them, he saw "
soon as the door began to open-Bilbo was hardly surprised at all. 
"the  windows  were dark and shuttered.  Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty "
were far apart. But at last he too was down. 
"Lock Gratland,4017952235843807,05-01-2000
"
"bending over him.  `Calling me early  aren't you,  Sam?' he said. `It's dark "
"was quite right, but he never found out any more about it. "
     The old man turned away  and went  towards a heap of fallen stones  and 
Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of the  
sight. Far behind them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads.  
is said  that  their lords  were  men of  N®menor  who had fallen  into dark 
"     Then  there  was Lobelia. Poor thing, she looked very old and thin when "
feared.' 
"beyond, and every hour  that is lost there will bring the triumph  of Sauron "
"bed.  For a  while he lay and listened for  sounds  of Gandalf's return, and "
fallen on the hills with storm. it could ha ve worked no greater ruin. 
""
see him again until this morning. 
"that shoulder, which rose to  the height of the fifth wall, was hedged  with "
 
"     'For my part  I heeded them not,' said Gimli; 'for we came then at last  "
"themselves, long ago I guessed that here in the White Tower, one at least of "
from far beneath him. Also he could see the glint of the moon on goblin spears and 
and he had not quite  Sam's faith in  this   slender grey line.  He found two 
"     They had reached the Mountain's foot on its northern side, and a little "
"greater than when  you bore me from  Zirak-zigil, where  my  old life burned "
"turned inward, pondering tidings of doubt and danger: a  bright sword, and a  "
to do so.' 
"as if some force were  at work other than his own will, he began  to  hurry, "
"Anabal Harrower,4017959393390521,18-07-1997
"
"     The  Tooks  did come sooner.  Before long  they  marched in, a  hundred  "
"heart, or what lies or threats had  led him on the long march from his home; "
"own,  as  well as their own names of months  and days, and  a great store of "
"     'Forlong!' men shouted.  'True heart, true friend!  Forlong!'  But when "
"than  he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall  in time (as "
"never come  here, and I don't want to see  no  more magic,' he said and fell "
"they have begun  to  arrive had  flustered him badly. He  liked visitors, but he  liked "
"part is to go out to  the battle of your City, where maybe death awaits you. "
"beneath their  feet smooth and  soft, and  after  a while they  walked  more "
"failed  us.  We're trapped.' He looked wildly up at the frowning wall, where "
voice left no doubt in their hearts:  the rider  was  of the Elven-folk.  No 
"chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with "
"and waiting only, as we have too often done. "
if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo's face. 
entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where  he stood. 
hobbit himself. 
"     'In many  ways,' answered  the wizard. It is far  more powerful than  I "
"     'Come on, you miserable sluggard!' Sam cried to  himself. `Now for it!' "
"the band. With another hop and a bound there came into  view a man, or so it "
"that the fugitives would stay near the water, he returned oft en to the banks "
"Chas Clericoates,4041590498378812,26-12-1994
"
"from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs  and arms "
     'Comfort me  not  with wizards!' said Denethor.  'The  fool's  hope has 
"and  fro, but all the  street seemed to be  choked with great  covered wains "
at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears to  all  the soft  
pale  king?' he  asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to  hear him speak to  
back here. Yet I am weary.' He gazed  back along the  way that they had come 
"Irene Ianson,4017954923421,18-05-1996
"
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even 
weighed  the same:  for that  Ring had  always  seemed  to  Frodo  to  weigh 
busy for a while. 
know what came over me.' 
"stabbing  at  their  fat  bodies  if  they  came  too  near.  The  spiders  swelled  with  rage, "
"Lotta Thornebarrow,4041592954432,07-12-1989
"
"Marlena Ceney,4041596493437,26-11-1984
"
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is 
"said at last,  'is it  then your errand to  seek death? For that  is all that "
to  right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed through some  arched 
"     'Aye, we must stick together,' growled Ugl®k. 'I don't trust you little "
They have called me that ever since I said yes to an elder Ent before he had 
"Gandalf  had never persuaded Elrond to let  us come,' he thought. 'What good "
"this important point too, or were they laughing in their sleeves at him all the time? "
"Smjagol? Gollum  the Great?  The Gollum! Eat fish every day,  three times  a "
Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The 
""
"     'He has,' said Pippin. 'He sent me away. But I am frightened. Something "
"fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air. "
"sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and  set with green gems. 'Here, lord,  "
we say in my  country. The strongest of us must seek a  way. See! Though all 
"got under  cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear  "
"Well,  now  he  says:  follow!'  He  kicked  Wormtongue in  the face  as  he "
"his master with  great  concern, shook his  head and  muttered:  'Plain as a  "
done. Gandalf spoke with great authority. We trust that it is as  you  would 
"     'For one thing,' said Thjoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke "
"####-Havens; for mine is the choice of L®thien, and as she so have I chosen, both "
distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped. 
laboured. 
"in the woods?"" "
"     'I  know. The Lord has given me  leave. But,  Beregond, if you can,  do "
"come  out of  the  East  was  receding, rolling away  southward to  the sea. "
"     `I wish I wasn't the last,' he groaned. `I wish old Gandalf was hare or  "
"home.' There standing at the  door was Saruman himself, looking well -fed and "
     After a  while  he spoke to  them; but they were slow  and  cautious in 
"was an important occasion, but Bilbo felt impatient. By now he was quite familiar "
"had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier  "
"Clywd Cluderay,4041373634281723,11-09-1989
"
yard they climbed up  the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a  
song of a glad water flowing  down  into  the night from a bright morning in 
"correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other  "
"shadow fell  on me  again. But I said  to  myself: ""After all he comes of  a  "
had ventured forward almost to the wall. They came to the king. 
"through his mind. Then he  got up, drew the grey elven-cloak about him,  and "
Then  Orcs came  with axes and cut down my trees. I came  and called them by 
"     Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. 'I  am in haste Pippin,' "
"     'It is all dark, but  it is not all night.' said Ghvn.  'When Sun comes "
he had survived made him think better of them. 
"Sting flashed out, and the sharp elven-blade  sparkled in the silver  light, "
"     Now  let  us go!' he said , drawing his  eyes away from  the South,  and "
""
the rest had already  been  drawn further inside. Tom  put his mouth to  the 
"####-of  Morgul had flung them into the fray; Easterlings  with axes, and Variags "
made of stone.' 
     In  the end he had to find what  he wanted for himself;  but he did not 
you were  still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods  of the Shire. 
exhaustion: his legs would not carry him as he wished. He was  too slow. The 
"Stevena Walthew,4017959459579,04-05-1992
"
"They only knew  that  they had come  to the end, when suddenly  they felt no "
"perfect little orc, if I may make so bold-at least you would be, if we could "
####-would have done. His  mind was full of doubt.  To all appearances Gollum was 
####-     Frodo did not like the sound of this. 'Come  on!' he  cried. 'We  can't  
breakfasts on end.' 
stranger finds us swift and hard. Come! Who are you?  Whom do you serve?  
"     `He is Aragorn  son of Arathorn,'  said Elrond;  `and  he is  descended "
"revealed to no one,  not even to Frodo  his favourite 'nephew'. And he still "
It was against the Gate that he would throw his heaviest weight. Very strong 
""
"     'The white horses of the Moon, "
"was a bitter pain, the other was clutched  at its breast, but held concealed "
"save the first. For partly in  the  primeval shaping  of the hill, partly by "
"Nikos Stener,4041599674389,12-07-1995
"
"were  assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim  was "
After  what  seemed  ages  further  they  came  suddenly  to  an  opening  where  no 
(comparative) peace  together  in one ancestral  and many -tunnelled mansion. 
"searching. bent towards  the ground,  among the folds and gullies leading up "
great many more words and bows.  
     Legolas laid down his paddle and took  up the  bow that he had  brought 
him lived again the  valour of Helm the Hammerhand.  But we cannot await 
     At  the bottom  they came with  a strange  suddenness  on the grass  of 
a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?' 
""
it. She seemed to be looking inside  me and asking me what I would do if she 
"could hope to serve  you, such doughty men and strong  as you seem, and if my "
"had  noticed when  they  first ventured into Fangorn,  but it  soon  passed. "
"Staddle, and many  even  from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the  road "
me ever since I left her desperate in Dunharrow and rode to the Paths of the 
once?' he asked.  'It would have saved time.' 
"Healing, and the sunlight warmed him, and he felt life run new in his veins; "
"short, yes, running fast. No time to lose. We must go. Wake up. Master, wake "
"together,  they toasted  Bilbo's birthday, and  they  drank his  health  and "
"ever  eat together. Some of the food  of Gondor they ate, and  wafers of the "
"     'They br ing fire,' said Thjoden,  'and they are  burning as  they come, "
"Tom got the branch in his teeth for that, and lost one of the front ones. It made "
old towers  beyond  the western borders  of the  Shire. But  it was  an  old 
"Odelinda Cargo,4769223673724580,12-11-1993
"
"passed  his two hundred  and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. "
"feet, and  forced his own limbs to move. Sam  stumbled beside him. One step, "
"gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.' "
     Down in  the  lowest and most  sheltered corner of the dell  they lit a  
"""And  I won't  take  that  from you. Bill Huggins,""  says Bert, and puts his  fist  in "
     Their talk  died down into a listening silence.  All  seemed  still and 
shrubs. The long journey from Rivendell had brought them far south of  their 
"Tybi Malarkey,4041599852638422,06-06-1993
"
deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side. 
Gimli. 
"meant no harm, on my honour, sir!' "
"####-I  learn  your  mind. You  were head of  the Council, but you have  unmasked "
as you go on your way.' 
     Already men were labouring to clear a way through the jetsam of battle; 
"his breath, pick himself up, or wave his sword, Gollum passed by, taking no notice "
Lothlurien that I  love! It would be a  poor life in a land where no mallorn 
White Downs far away on the western horizon they came to Bywater by its 
"     `There's nothing for it but  to scramble down  this gully,  Sam,'  said "
they were amazed at the change that had come over the Ents. It seemed now as 
"have passed that  way for  many a long year, not openly. Saruman  had secret "
"knees  (in  proper  dwarf-fashion),  till  he  stopped  frowning  and  burst  into  a "
"again,  seeing the  dismay in Pippin's  face. 'Those who have had heavy duty "
     Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many Orcs had 
"Melamie Fagge,4938393775893801,02-10-1999
"
"####-standing guard beside you. You were  pale and cold, and they feared that you "
any Gamgee to guess what he'll do next.' 
     So  tired was Frodo that his head  fell forward  on his  breast  and he 
"into the  gulf, for the slopes of the Morgai had already risen almost to the "
"     The original Red Book has  not been  preserved, but  many  copies  were "
and 
"marauding  fire  of  the  Dragon,  the  only  king  under  the  Mountain  we  have  ever "
"to speak, in answer to some  question, it  seemed.  His  voice  was deep and "
"lines, if that disaster had been averted. Its sources are things long before "
"Theresina Spurden,4041591170626,17-12-1981
"
would have the Mountains on their left. Some way  ahead Strider had caught a  
"voice of  Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with "
"once,  and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim, though under other name and "
any great virtue;  and indeed I  have often said to  my sisters when we came 
"lost  and  never  finding  his  friends  again.  In  the  end,  in  spite  of  warnings,  hunger "
####-they  could  see  him  as  a  spark  of  fire  rushing  towards  them  and  growing  ever 
"     'Wake  up,  Mr. Frodo!  They're gone, and  we'd better  go too. There's "
"huddled  himself together like a cornered spider. The winged shapes wheeled, "
"wood, led by Hald ir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground "
'Is there no other way?  ' he said. 
"Sloan Sallis,4041371722961966,02-10-1987
"
"against the  sky already red with sunset. Dusk came. They passed away,  grey "
"Abdul Fanshaw,4901720304620,16-03-1998
"
nothing happens before then.' 
""
"above him,  for  they  thought  that war was awakening again,  such as had not been "
"     'No, not even my eyes can  see him, my good Legolas,' said Aragorn. 'He "
"     Two  swift hours passed, and now the king  sat  upon  his  white horse, "
roar  of voices and the thudding of  the rams; and then in a sudden flash of 
"seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you blessed, "
when they turned to the right; and they  had to go some  distance along  the 
"     The Old Ent looked at them  long and searchingly, and spoke to  them in "
"####-     And the little dog laughed to see such fun, "
"Here  they  sat  on  wooden  benches  while  Gandalf  began  his  tale,  and  Bilbo "
"to them again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed south to the "
have faded: neither  Ring nor Bearer could long have eluded him. But now his 
Suddenly through a rent  in  the clouds behind them a shaft  of sun  stabbed 
"     ' ""Because it's my birthday, my love, and I wants it,"" said Smjagol. "
"said: 'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.' "
"     'But do not you know the word, Gandalf? ' asked Boromir in surprise. "
     'To fulfil our oath and have peace.' 
"and down,  round and round  them, and  drawing  ever inwards. Aragorn  stood "
""
"just now."" "
"on  its  prey, is smitten on the muzzle with a stinging rod. Rage filled him "
"land, "
"Nora Harrismith,4041378854215822,16-09-1984
"
"Ezekiel Regan,4041593860364,24-03-1990
"
"light  began  to  fail,  and  then  other  questions  were  asked.  Where  were  they,  and "
"knowing  what  to  say  all  at  once  in  a  moment,  when  obviously  the  exact  truth "
"They  looked West  and  there was  nothing,  and  East  there was  nothing,  and  in  the "
"Gimli son of Gluin: for your loss you suffer of your own  free will, and you  "
"     'Hey there!' cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing look in "
"with  the mountain. Within, upon the first floor above the street, up a wide "
were  beginning  to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain. 
"surrendered  the sceptre, and  laid the hand of  his daughter in the hand of "
"Charmain Trevers,4852190000637686,10-12-1988
"
"ghostly grey.  He almost welcomed the coming of  night,  for  then the world "
along. 
"last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their  legs, "
"old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was "
"explore  the  hall  while  they  had  the  chance,  and  willing  to  believe  that,  for  the "
     `Now on we  go!  ' he  said.  'Nice  hobbits! Brave  hobbits! Very very 
the  colour  of  his  now  dirty  and  tattered  sky-blue  hood  with  its  tarnished  silver 
"King Thjoden upon  a golden  bier,  and passed through the City  in silence.  "
"springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors;  and others had gone west,  and  "
short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all  was ready 
"stowed their goods. And they added  also coils of rope, three  to each boat. "
want such slaves?' 
"     'Very well,' said Sam heavily. `If it must be, let's get it  over! ' He "
"tottering forward, his groping hands held out, his head lolling from side to "
"The pent  waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale  Nen Hithoel, fenced "
"""Good-bye  then,  and  really  good-bye!""  said  Gandalf,  and  he  turned  his  horse "
####-and thus wrote Isildur therein: 
####-roots of the  hills and  slanting  westwards.  Beyond it were slopes covered 
not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come 
such as are  the Rohirrim and their kin  that  dwell still far in the North; 
many warm blankets. 
"     He  paused, silent for a moment.  Then without another  word he  turned "
few strides to a  narrow entrance. Through it a  worn path passed  and dived 
"there.'  Sam  stirred in  his  chair,  and  looked  at  the  farmer  with an "
####-     The last person  they passed was a sturdy  old gaffer clipping a hedge. 
"home. I am sure it is better in your hands."" "
down. 
"up behind  his friend. and  he clung to him, not much more at ease than  Sam "
was ready he went  with the Gaffer. In addition to all his  other  labours he 
"first  sign  that all  was not  quite as  it  should be, and always had been "
"     'Yes, that's so,'  said Sam. `And we shouldn't be here at all,  if we'd "
"""That's enough!"" said Beorn. ""Sit down and be quiet! Now go on, Gandalf!"" "
far from everything  that had ever  happened  to  them. A great longing  came 
would  probably be impossible ever to  make  him understand  or believe that 
"looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!' "
"Norrie Townson,4017957889397,29-08-1975
"
"     `Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies!' he whispered. `Wake up!  No time "
"     And I must follow, if I can, "
"been left with all the wretched treasure, than that these vile creatures should get it, "
and 
for good!' 
"house and farm-buildings peeping ou t among the trees ahead. The Maggots, "
"all power, save his voice that  can still daunt you and deceive you, if  you  "
"as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and pools of faint "
"     The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown "
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in  this point for  
"was  speaking,  the  thought  came  into  his  heart  of  the  fabled  treasure  of  the "
"wonderful sunshine and delicious rain, in due times and perfect measure, but "
"     `But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at first about Isildur's  Bane. Forgive "
and go  to our duties  at  the opening hour. But do not despair!' He laughed 
One 
"the orc-liquor was still hot in him. His wits, too, were wide-awake. "
"went  on, lowering his voice, 'and  though I cannot disappear, I have hunted "
     They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but  they did  not quite 
"business.  Then  they  came  to  lands where people  spoke  strangely,  and  sang  songs "
"Come back to the Va lley,  "
"     `Save me, Mr. Frodo! ' gasped Sam.  `I'm  drownded.  I can't  see  your "
against the windows  of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. He had not had 
chariots of chieftains  and laden wains. All  the power of the Dark Lord was 
"Gayel La Grange,4041376162509,11-04-1991
"
"Harlin MacAscaidh,4041372831354,09-07-1988
"
"Coleman Wabersinke,4041379940018,29-09-1982
"
will get back in the pan sooner or later; and it is to be hoped we shan't. Also eagles 
"     `Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing  up.  `Here is our noble cousin! Make "
"Jobina Brixey,4017955313259,04-09-1975
"
"handle  of  his  axe,  and  his  dark  eyes flashed.  'Give  me  your  name, "
you have heard me.' 
     People  stared  much  as  he  passed. To  his  face  men  were  gravely 
"""I don't know if it has occurred to you that, even if you could steal the gold bit "
"Emyn  Muil: the stone kings and  the  seats of Lhaw and Hen, and  the  great "
 
"pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because we were "
"overtaken  the sun,  as it  began to go  down.  They could all see the black  "
"'Run, Mr. Frodo!' he cried.  'No, not that way! There's a sheer drop over the "
"close-serried  companies, drove against  their wavering  foes, piercing  the "
"Denethor, 'and his companion may lodge with him for the present, if he will.  "
"with a passing dread, while the less stout-hearted quailed and wept. "
""
things  go  on  as they are going. The Dark  Lord is  putting forth all  his 
"given  by  some  Southron arrow,  I  would guess.  Who drew it forth? Was it "
Also  I  was  anxious  about  replenishing  our  small  stock  of  provisions.  I  had  not 
     in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer; 
"high price,' said Gamling. "
"there are  some things, of  course, whose side I am altogether not  on; I am "
"that they had built themselves, and there they were tied hand  and foot, and "
"people  on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a  rule, and not "
"""I suppose you will all stay to supper?"" he said in his politest unpressing tones. "
"tempted luck too long!"" "
"     'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,' said Legolas, 'but his arms are at his "
his last effort had brought him. The Mountain standing ominous and alone had 
just heard the name Baggins before  you  turned up.  What do you think  that 
"""The forest goes on for ever and ever and ever in all directions! Whatever shall "
suppose  it  is more  or  less  breakfast-time  –  if  there  is any breakfast  to have. But  I 
 
"Benjie Gunson,4041377848564949,23-02-1979
"
"for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlurien. "
"After all we're only four, even if we are armed.' "
"find Orcs east of  the River. Don't ask Smjagol. Poor, poor Smjagol, he went  "
"down with this to your home, Sam!' he said. 'Then cu t along the Row and meet "
"####-     The  Elves  spoke together in  soft  voices, and questioned Legolas  in "
####-     and the cat began to wail; 
"Gertrud Pawlata,4017951404057991,16-01-1986
"
"beginning  to  think,  is  it?  It  is  always  poor  me  that  has  to  get  them  out  :  of  their "
"as they caught the light of the westering moon. He wondered where Frodo was,  "
"great  disquiet within,  the mantling  clouds swirled, and for a moment drew "
and refreshing. He was  with  Gandalf. The horror of  the stone  and  of the 
"     Already it  seemed years to  Pippin  since he had sat  there before, in "
"There was just room to get the ponies through with a squeeze, when they had been "
which he had neglected to put out. 
"blade, too,"" he thought; ""and goblins are not very near, and yet not far enough."" "
than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can 
"Adolpho Baise,4041592463343,29-02-1984
"
"cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears."" "
"     'Lead  the way,  Gimli! ' he said. 'Pippin and  Merry next. Straight on "
wish  may await  the oncoming of the hour till either the ways of  the world 
""
"tracker.  'He  messed up  the  scent  back  there,  pinching  that  cast -off "
come  to that? And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that  all  my strength 
"shines!'  And  to Frodo  she  said:  'Farewell,  Elf-friend, it was a  merry "
""
"Theodosia Queree,4572307476626,15-06-2000
"
them all and in the Darkness bind them. 
Orcs were demanding a halt. Ugl®k was shouting. He felt himself flung to the 
better now.' 
"Forsaken Inn, a day's  journey east of Bree,' answered Strider. 'Some say it "
"the Rohirrim have  aided us,  but now the  Lord  Denethor asks for  all your "
"has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks easier too.' "
then  bending  swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from 
man whom they had left crouching in his chair or leaning on his stick? 
inquisitive and  curious-minded of that  family was called  Smjagol. He  was 
"     `It will take days to clear the road like this,' he said. `What's to be "
beside their beds.  
"whatever happens after this. But what comes next?"" "
horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the 
     'Good evening. Mr. Baggins!' he said. 'Glad indeed I am to see you safe 
'But don't forget I've arrested you.' 
"warg howls, there also the orc prowls.' "
"Ax Emanulsson,4041599293537,15-07-1991
"
"     'He is,' said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling. "
"plans."" "
strengthened his host by some three  score  of Riders that  came late to the 
"Karel Kettow,4041593905089295,26-01-1990
"
"them  to  help.  Bifur  and  Bofur  were  less  knocked  about  and  drier,  but  they  lay "
coming  up  the  valley  at  a  great  pace.  They  halted  between  the  river  and  the 
     and the store of silver spoons! 
"####-armour  is  like  tenfold shields, my  teeth are swords, my claws spears,  the shock of "
"Darryl Chandlar,4491841469861988,20-04-1998
"
"'Where iss it, where iss it: my Precious, my Precious? It's ours, it is, and "
"there, and Djorwine their chief was among them. So they laid them apart from "
     `Quick now. Mr.  Frodo!' he said. `I've had a  bit of  a search to find 
and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur piled uncomfortably near the fire. 
"     Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. 'Hill. Yes, that was it. But "
"####-     Gollum  reluctantly agreed  to  this, and  he  turned  back towards the "
- not unless he's caught himself.' 
"he  cocked  his  head  on  one  side,  as  if  to  listen;  and  again  he  sang,  and  again  he "
"that goes seeking death, having no  hope. Pity  filled his heart  and  great "
Far over the misty mountains cold 
Pass it round!' 
each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shone forth in 
     behind the Sun and light of Moon. 
"     'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do  as  you please in your madness,  but let me "
"are only counterfeits. made by the  Enemy in the Great  Darkness, in mockery "
"""A  little  sleep  does  a  great  cure  in  the  house  of  Elrond,""  said  he;  ""but  I  will "
astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them stand back to 
"     There forged was blade, and bound was hilt; "
the dusk. 
"####-and folded his cold hands upon his breast,  and wrapped his cloak about him; "
"Marney MacMickan,4041378197321,16-09-1999
"
ha! ha.'  
"cold lake far  from the light, and on an island  of rock  in the water lived "
"waybread, and of  what Captain Faramir gave us, to keep  me on my legs for a  "
####- 
the yet worse things follow that soon shall come upon us.' 
"your own like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and  "
"thick black beard and' hair, and great bare arms and legs with knotted muscles. He "
"stories,' said  Merry.  'Yet we've been about for quite a long  time.  We're "
"what  evil  fate  had  befallen  him,  magic  or  dark  monsters;  and  shuddered  as  they "
"""One or three you meant, I see!"" said Beorn. ""But these aren't hobbits, they are "
"Gabriell Birkhead,4041599142908,11-02-1984
"
"bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red "
"before them.  Jomer rode there, the white horsetail on his  helm floating in "
long clinging threads. 
"     'It  saved his  life anyhow,' said  the soldier. 'Why, before I knew he "
is gone and all darkness is washed  clean!' Then he laid her hand in Jomer's 
"no way over  it  below  its sources  in the Ettenmoors, except by  the  Last  "
anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait.' 
"Guard until his case was judged. In that same company Pippin was also to go, "
arguing!' 
"Ariana Prendeguest,4041594587511556,03-09-1992
"
among the hills. Far inward they  glimpsed a tumbled mountain -mass with  one 
"must  fight.  He  must  stab  the  foul  thing,  put  its  eyes  out,  kill  it.  It  meant  to  kill "
"was upon his arm before her cold tips, and behold! a little mist was laid on "
by 
""
see Strider  and Gandalf come riding up at the head of  an army. But  out of 
high walls.  
guessed right or not. 
hunt.' 
     `What were you doing?' 
"Nikolai Joris,4041373499920,25-05-2001
"
matter?' 
"Darlene Fetherby,4017956715908923,09-04-1987
"
and a  splash he fell face  downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went 
"Nesta Tutchener,4041597607370358,26-08-1978
"
####-whispering darkness behind. 'Keep your hoards and your secrets hidden in the 
the legend of the wealth of Thror. So it was that Bard's messengers found him now 
"     The light was  still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed "
"people,  because  of  the war which  you  have  heard mentioned,  but which  does  not "
"before,  and the chief  Took had borne that title ever since. The  Thain was "
"knifed me, the dung,  before I throttled him. You must go, or  I'll eat you. "
"dreaming with his chin upon his knees. ""It was like a globe with a thousand facets; "
"Days.  Upon it , as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the  outer had "
there  was a crumbling helm  and crown. Great  power and majesty they  still 
"There's a  wicked feeling  about this  place.' He  sniffed. 'And  a smell, I "
"     'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling, "
"broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock -wall before "
unclenching feebly. He put  the bundle on the floor and with  his right claw 
####-left went off  as  fast as they could.  Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off 
"     'Why,  this  is  the Stock-brook!' said Pippin. 'If we are going to try "
     `Then why is he coming down just here? ' asked Sam. 
"firmly under his arms, Sam staggered to his  feet; and then to his amazement  "
They 
"already deeply obliged to you. But in the meantime we are famished with hunger."" "
 
"     The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly the "
"Bard,  of  course,  refused  to  allow  the  dwarves  to  go  straight  on  to  the "
become almost unbearable. 
"     'I'll try  and be  a  bit  quicker, Sam,'  said  Frodo,  drawing a deep "
     Before  the  next day dawned  their journey to  Mordor  was  over.  The 
"     'Seldom in my life has any boat come  out of  the North,  and  the Orcs "
"intently. The  other  hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not,  but they all "
"     'I   can't  do   that,  Mr.  Baggins.  The  inn's   closed.  There's  a  "
"of  Isildur and Anbrion, my sires of old.  Under  their shadow  Elessar, the "
"catch  them;  so that  if they do not return of their  own will, we must  do "
"often wanted to  see a  bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but "
"the Black Riders, the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind "
"     her prow was fashioned like a swan, "
"""And  why  is  it  called  the  Carrock?""  asked  Bilbo  as  he  went  along  at  the "
"     He was very tired, for though they had  ridden slowly, they had  ridden "
"snow-white cloth  of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck  "
"     'We will come, if our own lords allow it,' said Gimli. 'Well, farewell. "
     `I  once knew every spell in all the tongues  of Elves or  Men  or Orcs 
"     'The gift seems already to be  given,'  said Thjoden. 'But hearken all! "
with an expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished  joy. 
"     `You  speak  gravely,'  said Elrond, `but  I am in doubt. The Shire,  I "
I followed them here.  I slipped  over the gate just behind them.  Maybe Mr.  
"brink was green, as if it  glowed still in memory of the sun that  had gone. "
"Clio Ingon,4017959526120,06-06-1993
"
"     'The King?' said Sam. 'What king, and who is he?' "
"into  you! A more  wholesome sort  of  feeling, too, than  the heat  of that "
"messengers! That for them! When I see one, I'll take notice, perhaps.' "
"cannot ride, even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late.' "
using  his hands as well as his  feet. Frodo  and  Sam were hard put to it to 
power  of that thing  which is now destroyed; and  all that was done by that 
     Frodo looked down on to the road. At any rate nothing was moving  on it  
"Jourdain Odda,4041379309560,28-12-1976
"
"Bertrand O'Kerin,4017952457299,12-11-1980
"
Thrihyrne: now very near they stood  on the  northernmost arm of  the  White 
"     `Yes, perhaps,  yes,' said Gollum. `Smjagol always helps, if they  asks "
"our decisions! For the common good I am  willing to redress the past, and to "
"a sword. In her hand she bore a cup, and  she set it to her lips and drank a  "
reeds  and tussocks that from  the sound  of them were evil relatives of the 
     They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the  South  Wind 
were at the time of this  tale long past and  the Hobbits  had again  become 
"hobbit-holes in the  bank on the north  side  of the Pool were deserted, and "
comfortably  and  think  of  a  better  plan-but  I don't suppose  I shall ever get hold of 
"Vallie Whitten,4017958692410,15-12-1986
"
battle. But the most part fled eastward  as  they could; and some cast their  
"     'So Aragorn has come then,' said Jomer. 'Is he still here?' "
"safe,' answered Grishnbkh. "
"another  way  that there was, once upon a  time.  Nice  master. Smjagol very "
What's the time? Is it today or tomorrow? ' 
"barred  the  way with spears.  'Stay, strangers here unknown!' they cried in "
reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly -trees whose grey-green trunks 
"men of Dale."" "
"a pale ribbon, down into chill grey mists that  no  gleam of sunset touched. "
"     For though it was day, to her surprise "
the 
"needed, I will smoke and think. I had some of Saruman's best in my pack, but "
     They made  their  way slowly  and  cautiously  round the  south-western 
said. 'You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the Morning. And 
"'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out "
     It was no  more than a  league  to where the out-walls had stood.  They 
At  the  end  of  a  fortnight  Thorin  began  to  think  of  departure.  While  the 
"     'I will forget my wrath for  a while, Jomer son of Jomund,' said Gimli; "
behind: 
"under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they  "
"Pepi Spavins,4041594767444,12-06-1988
"
"not  relent. It whirled about  them thicker  than  ever, and the  wind  blew "
the Cross-roads touching the head of the fallen king. But  to  the fields of 
"     'I  will,' said  Aragorn  heavily.  `You  followed  my  lead almost  to "
"ahead, not  in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, if you understand me.' "
"that would give them tidings of Balin's fate, or show what had become of his "
believed. Only to Frodo did he show  the account of  his Journey that he was 
his leave. Who are you? And what is your haste?' 
"I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless  such power  "
"     'What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?' he said. 'Do we sit here "
"Nydia Spurge,4041370719865123,24-03-1989
"
"""Come, come!"" said Thorin  laughing – his spirits had begun to rise again, and "
filth  and stench  and all that; it does not bear remembering.' With that he 
     'What  about the  others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder  what sort of  dr eams 
 
"realize what that would mean. It  seemed different so far away, in the Shire "
"all free folk of the West, now  listen to my lay. For  I will sing to you of "
"with terrible  speed  into  the  West.  Gollum,  however,  was helpless with "
fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach 
you see: a nasty  mess all the way  back to  that cursed crack  of  hers? If 
"     'Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch  in the wall of "
"itself,  nor break its  power over  others.  And now he is withdrawn  into a  "
     'And so I  have been  sent at last by Dbin  to warn  Bilbo  that  he is 
Swiftly may he bear me back again!' 
"end;  and  Bard  too,  and  the  Lake-men  and  the  merry  elves.  Misery  me!  I  have "
horrible sounds of Smaug's anger were echoing  in  the stony hollows  far above; at 
"were running about howling and setting others alight, till their own friends chased "
again. 
thankful that they had not been  caught on the ground; but he felt  that the 
"find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I "
"bridge  to  the  land  was  thrown  down  and  destroyed,  before  the  roar  of  Smaug's "
"Jamil Lyttle,4041377298166781,24-02-1990
"
     Those who  had asked for  more information about hobbits eventually got  
than tired. It seemed like all the way to tomorrow and over it to the days beyond. 
with  little  order; some  were running wildly  as if  pursued. Away to  the 
"place will be attacked again. Smaug knows now how I came down to his hall, and "
"""I  don't  see  that  this  will  help  us  much,""  said  Thorin  disappointedly  after  a "
"pits and  poisonous mounds grew hideously clear.  The  sun  was up,  walking "
"after winter  to  a  spring  of  joy. Gandalf  and Bilbo  rode behind the Elvenking, and "
"ashes, he can't eat that. He must  starve. But  Smjagol  doesn't  mind. Nice "
rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.' 
For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the 
"dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had "
"Ferd Muckeen,4041598227395,14-08-1978
"
"Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch,  until he could peer over it "
"could hinder him he  thrust the brand amid the fuel, and at once it crackled "
"a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, up a broad stair,  along a wide road "
"     Then  Pippin  stabbed  upwards, and  the  written blade of  Westernesse "
sayings  go. But I've heard tales of the big folk down away in the Sunlands.  
####-in cinders lie 
"Pincas Slegg,4017958575656,25-01-1991
"
hand the mist was now almost gone;  though here and there it lay  in hollows 
"across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.' "
while the echoes ran away into the roof.  
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening. 
"""Now  I  wonder  what  on  earth  Smaug  is  playing  at,""  he  said.  ""He  is  not  at "
""
"Mellie Jeram,4017953838540741,10-07-1984
"
"and all  their history,  and despite your scorn,  foul Mouth of  Sauron, you  "
unfriendly  eye. 'But you were always a  reckless lad. When  I heard you had 
     'Splendid!'  laughed  Ugl®k.  'But  unless  you've  got some  guts  for  
"two-footed,  except  birds;  nor  four-footed,  except  one  fox  and  a  few "
"than  half  a  mind  to  pretend  to,  and  go  and  hide  behind  the  beer  barrels  in  the "
"may be,' she said, `yet here she has met her match in  courtesy. Gently  are "
"something moving on the ground? Dark little things. Yes, men on horses: four "
"Fons Cecely,4017954863940,26-06-1985
"
"     'And glad shall I be to see it again,' said Thjoden, 'though brief now, "
must put  mirth aside. Elladan  and Elrohir  have returned  out  of the Wild 
"Orton Callan,4041596682891544,25-05-1975
"
hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? ' 
"""You're a booby,"" said William. "
"the  goblin  patrols  were  still  hunting  with  Wargs  for  the  dwarves,  and  they  were "
"meets the  eye, as I said  of  him long ago.'  Frodo wondered  if the remark "
"     'Well, Merry! Thank goodness I have found you!' "
I that  have failed. Vain was Gandalf's  trust in me.  What  shall I do now?  
"At last they were set on their  feet once  more. For a moment they stood so, "
sand-pit. I don't know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he 
"white  nets.  Then  suddenly he knew that he must go,  and  say  good-bye to "
indeed.' 
"Idell Tomashov,4017956156258937,15-12-1996
"
"     ` ""The enemy must have some great need or purpose,"" said Radagast; ""but "
""
####-unpacking  of  the  dwarves  or  the  footsteps  of  the  four  scouts.  Their  astonishment 
frail though it be. 
large  one  of  the  Country  Round with  all  his  favourite walks marked  on  it  in  red 
second postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf's friend at 
got up and ran back here like a hare. ' 
could kill you. And I  should have killed you already without  so much talk. 
     'My  dear  Frodo!'  exclaimed  Gandalf.  'Hobbits  really  are  amazing 
"     'Don't let  us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I "
"lands where  you  now  are.  Tell me  of  Boromir my  brother,  and  of  old "
"####-the same,  I'm beginning to feel that if we've got to go on,  then we'd best "
again. I reckon this day is nearly over.' 
"silence, suddenly. In it we  heard a shrill  laugh from a high window in the "
"Bryon Bagott,4041374489649,28-07-1982
"
     of mithril and of elven-glass 
Fa-la! 
     as beacons mountains burned at evening; 
"     '  ""This  I will have as weregild for  my father, and my  brother,""  he "
"drooping over the pool,  stood  a dead  tree, and  the falling drops dripped "
"mocked. 'Kill him, if you think there  are enough of you, my brave hobbits!' "
at his memories as he spoke. 'The Lord went away from the room where 
that they did not  come on up the Hill seemed a  great relief. 'I am sick of 
swiftly at his side. 
founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized. 
the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky above 
"surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he "
"gone to find  some,' said Pippin, busy  setting out the food, and cups. 'You  "
"D'arcy Twiggins,4017950068411,19-07-1987
"
"and  still,  Faramir  told  his tale, with  his  eyes  for the most part  on "
"Beryle Mallett,4041377454483,24-12-1983
"
"     And  with that song the hobbits stood upon  the threshold, and a golden "
"beside  him;  the  others  were  some  way  ahead  picking  out  a  slow  road,  for  there "
"####-     Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their beds and "
 
"like  Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except "
I'll do my best to make amends.' 
"sighed. 'What a  tale we have been in, Mr. Frodo, haven't  we?' he said.  'I  "
beauty for ever beyond  its reach. His song in  the Tower had been  defiance 
stones that Wormtongue had defiled. 
"one Aragorn son of Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.' "
to enter Mordor this way.  So  Smjagol is very  afraid. He does not  want to 
"Marcille Touson,4445247949794004,15-06-1998
"
"liege-lord, whether he  claim it or no. His wish  is to me a command. I will "
"""Your  grandfather,""  said  the  wizard  slowly  and  grimly,  ""gave  the map  to  his "
"     'Why,  why wasn't it destroyed?'  cried Frodo. 'And how  did  the Enemy  "
"     'The words are known indeed,' said Faramir in astonishment. `It is some "
"     'That  is heavy  tidings,'  said Jomer.  'At least to  me, and to many; "
"Stevena Pantling,4041374411654553,17-01-1980
"
"do before we go to bed - under a roof, for  tonight at any rate.' "
"tumult  of many voices far away, cursing and  wailing in  the darkness,  and  "
"comfortable night in bed!"" "
Round and round far underground 
"     `Who are they, and what do they say? ' asked Merry. "
not  all  alone. They  were surrounded.  In  the dark  on  the  edge  of the 
that you have!' 
"barrel and intricate wards, made of silver. ""Keep it safe!"" "
     Even  as these thoughts  pierced him with dread  and held him  bound as 
"     `So I  stayed  there that  night, wondering much what had become of the "
"men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and erect. Where was the "
"journeyed by water  in these parts before, not between here and the rapids of "
said Gimli. 
among the hills  and disappeared from view.  Aragorn  rode  to  the Dike and 
looked after it.' 
"clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and  ran "
"present.  Still watch if you wish.  Give me about  two hours, not more,  and "
Then he  let sound a great concourse  of trumpets taken  from the enemy; and 
whom no other hand can tame. And here beside me  is Aragorn son of 
"story of his life, since all was in ruin. "
and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take counsel together. 
"before he died: You may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day, but "
"again.  For  a  long  time  he was  tossed and shaken, and then  slowly  the "
heard!' He stopped and he turned towards his  master. 'But how's Mr. Frodo?' 
"""Where is it? Where iss it?"" Bilbo heard him crying. ""Losst it is, my precious, "
####- 
unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or  cracker  
"Gunter Laugier,4029395622161662,28-10-1995
"
""
"     It seemed plain that the  farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do "
smouldered in the hill beneath. 
command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.' 
did not get up again. 
""
"imagine you know the answer, of course, or can guess it as easy as winking, since "
light of the open door. 
"to  help us, magic or no. It's  when we leave  this land that we shall  miss "
"     'As  for  me,'  said  Imrahil,  'the  Lord  Aragorn  I  hold to  be  my "
"Francene O' Ronan,4041372576629,19-06-1985
"
to live among such  excellent and  admirable hobbits. Tremendous outburst of 
"Bartlet Corringham,4041370219651,12-12-1991
"
"was some trick of his tears, as he peered out at that high stony place where "
"burglars,"" he added as a parting shot, as he darted back and fled up the tunnel. "
said Pippin. 'Good luck to you!' 
"him,  and the dim light of  the last day of  their  quest found them side by "
 
"orc-rag close round you, and  put the belt outside it. Then this can go over "
coming of the day. 
"There they lay for some time, puffing and panting. put very soon they began to "
"     'The  end will not be  long,'  said the king. 'But I will not end here, "
opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare.  and through the 
"you on  your legs in a wonderful way, though  it doesn't satisfy the innards "
"Georgia Coils,4041375224631,10-11-1996
"
he  took many draughts.  Merry followed  him.  The water refreshed them  and 
"there  should  be  anything  to  note,  rouse me  first, mind  you!  I will  lie  in  the  inner "
"the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in  his  chair, and the lamp "
be lost. Make haste!' 
"keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running, running behind. "
"from a window far above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy, "
Strider about a dozen times  already  this  morning. But you haven't told me 
shall I come up?' Without waiting for an answer he began to climb. 
"willing to take  into unknown perils.  But  if you look for a  companion, be "
beyond was shining through a hole. He saw now: it  was a black  tower poised 
"     Of old he was an Elven-king, "
the silence; and beside  it on the hither side a road went winding down like 
"     `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up! ' "
Isengard the King chose Jomer and twenty men of his household. With  
"     After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away "
"     'Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over  (after that your "
"shall  give them leave,  and  more strict is  the command in  these days  of "
ponies'  pace was quick enough to  push  the Shirriffs along as fast as they 
but I've been expecting you since the Spring. You haven't hurried have you?' 
can wear it under your  outer clothes.  Come  on! You must share this secret  
felt the change of clime.  Here Spring was  already busy about them:  fronds 
"into  a  dark brooding  shade,  and  silence.  Yet still it was filled  with "
"     `Maybe, it  would  have been  better  had  Boromir  fallen  ther e  with "
"     'Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee,'  said Frodo. 'Indeed,  if you  will "
admit that there had been nothing else he could do. 
"ahead, the worst road of all.' "
"Fianna Chaudron,4017953779529513,18-04-1999
"
"mountains and the sea. They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood "
"Clio Wagen,4779252253659492,03-01-1988
"
"Janie Proven,4089241283914527,08-08-1986
"
my keeping.' 
"####-     Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, flitting behind "
"want  to be parted  from you like this, Thjoden King. And as all my  friends "
"nor Halbarad  to  the Northlands,  dour -handed  Ranger.  No few  had fallen, "
####-     Nambril! Nai hiruvalyl Valimar. 
the  rowan has enough  and  to  spare. But  the birds became  unfriendly and 
"     `Then  all  the  more need  to fill our bottles,' said  Sam. `But there "
a-thinking  of? You  should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water! 
"     'So four of the Company still remain,'  said Aragorn. 'We  will ride on "
"merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than talking. "
""
in  their  young  days.  That  being  so  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  guards  were 
"####-the fields, or ridden in upon a holiday from the green vales in the hills.  "
####- 
"one  thirsty. Water, he said, they would not need to carry this side of the forest, for "
"cheering when she appeared,  leaning on Frodo's arm but still clutching  her  "
"case we are in great peril here after  dark, since the attack of last night, "
"rage,  stabbing the air,  and smiting the  stones, and shouting  challenges.  "
"the match of Southfarthing,  as I've always said though I'm all  for Bree in "
"guess  what her  words  may  mean.  Your pardon,  Gimli! I was pondering the "
""
"much further  off, receding ea stward in  a long curve  that was lost in  the "
that  ancient  path into his land than any  other  that his skill could have 
"love tales of  that sort. And  I believe  them  too,  whatever Ted may  say. "
at the other. 
"Crista Bugs,4041374241225111,19-03-1978
"
"Virgina Cinelli,4041375654688,18-10-1996
"
only a few miles broad. 
Mirkwood and beyond; and south in Harad. And now all  realms shall be put to 
 
"talked of their night  before in the tree-tops, and of  their day's journey, "
""
"once. It is a hundred years and three and fifty since I came out of the egg, but I do "
"said  ""Men out of the  South, all  in red and gold;"" I said  ""were there any "
"shouting,' she answered. 'All  I hope is that those murdering devils  do not "
"     'All right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rather startled. 'Here it is!' Slowly "
"Northrup Isard,4041374874393285,12-11-1980
"
rested. The  Golden Hall  was arrayed  with fair hangings and it was  filled 
"     `Oh,  I don't know. I can't count  days in Rivendell,' said Bilbo. 'But "
"Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and  Willie Banks from up-away, and one of "
"Henry Fennessy,4324922217955,14-04-1996
"
"Soon  they  reached  a  courtyard,  three  walls  of  which  were  formed  by  the "
"said,' the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite to "
height! But looking's better than climbing.' 
neither so deep nor so dangerous. In fact the subjects of the king mostly lived and 
"and  out  on  to a  wide  upland.  The  Firienfeld  men called it,  a  green "
"     'Stand, Men of the West! Stand and wait! This is the hour of doom.' "
"Kaila McElwee,4041597901305274,09-01-1975
"
"lights,  yet as they walked a  shimmer, like the light of the moon above the "
"They had not been at table long, in fact they had hardly reached the third cake, "
"     They had not seen  the Lord and Lady  again, and they had little speech "
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped 
precious small chance of ever finding the dwarves again. He did not know the way 
"glance  and turning to Frodo. 'Smjagol has talked  to Orcs,  yes  of course, "
"Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith. "
it  has not been hard  for me to  read  your mind and memory. Do not  worry! 
but he did not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment clasping it . 
perceiving  that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not 
Aragorn. 'May the Shire live for ever unwithered!' And kissing Merry he went 
"it wasn't there, I'd have to say I was beaten in the end.' "
her to this pass!' 
"the  Forest  there  was  whistling,  crying  and  piping.  Far  over  Mirkwood  tidings "
"That story  was derived  from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed "
flames.  Long  he  had  hunted  in  vain  till  the  dawn  chilled  his  wrath  and  he  went 
"Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as "
first to the father.' 
turning him adrift. You'd make some folk pay for their dirty work.' 
""
"Sonny Viggers,4759576960006,03-07-1987
"
     Beneath the roof there is a bed; 
through the culvert  through  which the stream  flowed out. There  they  had 
one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And I marvel to 
"None  of  them were  better  off  than  Fili,  and  some  of  them were worse.  Some  had "
"the water, too!  There are  many streams  and wells in  the Mines,  but they "
####-     `Gondor! ' cried Boromir and leaped after him. 
"all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him at last: Gollum. Then "
"Those in the foremost files  bore torches.  On they  came, red flames in the "
"breakfast before you go."" "
"track,  often  lost,  often  rediscovered,  that  wandered  on  to  the  top  of  the  southern "
"at the end of the mountains: Nan Curunnr, the Valley of Saruman. "
"     'Dead  men are not friends to living men, and give them no gifts,' said "
meant that things should remain  where they had set them).  So the  Entwives 
     The night  deepened.  There  came  the  soft  sound of horses  led with 
"Wyn Pincked,4017956674147,07-08-1982
"
"lying  down  after  doing  his  part  in  setting  the  fire  going,  since Oin  and Gloin  had "
carry on Bilbo's reputation for oddity. He  refused to go into mourning; and 
"Ardyce Bortoli,4017954763009,02-01-1986
"
"Kearney Corro,4041598374163,18-12-1980
"
"found.  Swords  in  these  parts  are  mostly  blunt,  and  axes  are  used  for  trees,  and "
flowed  from the mountains to  a lake. But no green thing grew there  in the 
friends crossed after the  flood had passed; and they found you lying on your  
"long since I heard them, and I thought deeply  before I could recall them to "
been 
'And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand  mail -clad 
cracking slabs and stones. 
"when  he  had  at  last  told  me his history,  as  far  as  the end of  the "
     'I  am being eaten alive!'  cried  Pippin. 'Midgewater!  There are more 
much about happenings  in the wide world outside the Shire. The tidings were 
"Pippin  was already leading  the pony up the  path, when Sam  (who had  been "
"beside  them;  and  beyond, going  steeply  down, was  a road between  sheer "
"     'Bill Ferny,' said Merry, 'if you don't open that gate in ten  seconds,  "
     For still  there are so many things 
hand met what felt like a tiny ring of cold metal lying on the floor of the tunnel. It 
"I saw,  something a little strange. It was getting deep dusk, when the  eyes "
"rayed Sun,  and  about  them  was written  many  runes; for  Aragorn son  of "
"     Saruman laughed.  'So you have heard the name, have you? All  my people "
council in their caves. 
"I stayed the  night in Bree, and decided that I had no time to return to the "
tried and found blocked. It was still blocked. 
into decay; and already it lacked half the men that could have dwelt at ease 
"three to nine). A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard, and reminded "
thence with three others that could also be horsed. The rest of my company I  
"back  with  one  big  push,  and  they  all  went  inside.  There were  bones  on  the  floor "
     'You have read his book!' cried Frodo.  'Good heavens above! Is nothing 
""
they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been  planted many  generations 
"subsided.  Here  and  there  gloomy pools  remained,  covered with  scum and "
"Hershel Woolacott,4041376580332366,20-10-1982
"
strong; and I have never allowed anyone  to stand me  on  my  head. So if it 
"'There's something fishy in this, my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off "
"east, and his fair face was troubled. 'I do not  think that any would come,' "
Frodo?' 
"     'Never has such  a thing happened  in my  time!' he cried,  raising his "
"believed in one so lean and withered.  He could work much mischief still, if "
"Alister Reeve,4017952742762458,19-07-1978
"
"clambered down, groping, stumbling, scrambling among rock and briar and "
denied him the passage.' 
before the face of the foremost Rider. 
the word had a foul taste that he savoured painfully. 'You  speak of what is 
"amiss, and sent  messages as swiftly as they could. They  said that the Nine "
"""Of the things which you suspect and imagine we had no idea at all. We sheltered "
most.' 
"     At last the king's company came to a sharp brink, and the climbing road "
"upwards, until they were fifty feet high  or more, and along each wall stood "
"     'Here  is the last parting of our ways,' said Faramir. 'If you take  my "
"####-     'Nay!  The  riders are little  more  than  five leagues distant,'  said "
"Gibb Bavidge,4041594488504,14-04-1992
"
"Then  they  stopped  and  shouted  out:  ""Fly  away  little  birds!  Fly  away  if  you "
"     'Orders, you lubber. And what are  you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking "
"beside him, and kneeling he stooped  low over the bodies of  his companions.  "
"land. Between them and  the smoking mountain, and about  it north and south, "
"Valentina Hayne,4017954536282594,26-02-1979
"
over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before  them. A dread  fell on 
####-care in the dark.' 
 
""
"like  the  noise  of  a  large  pot  galloping  on  the  fire,  mixed  with  a  rumble  as  of  a "
"     'So do you,' Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked "
"     'His doubt will  be  growing, even  as we  speak here. His  Eye is  now "
"them, black silent shapes on either side of the gate through which the glare "
"other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now I will put "
"""And winter comes after autumn,"" said Bifur.  "
begrudged.' 
"Never thirsty, ever drinking, "
we can -- if we can!  ' 
"stifling, even before his lid was on. Bilbo had done what he could to close holes in "
"right here  in Bree, bad trouble. Why, we had a real set-to, and there  were "
see your mind. You  will take the Ring  to Sauron and  sell us all. You have 
""
the  Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. 'Peril comes in the night when least 
"     Nothing happened. There  was a  gasp  of astonishment from the hobbits,  "
"guess.  All the ruffians  do what he says; and what he says is mostly  hack, "
"council."" "
"     Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating! "
"startled  me,  let alone the  others. A  little  addition  of  your  own,  I "
     'There are trolls!' Pippin panted. 'Down in a clearing in the woods not 
"the  tale  of  the kings rolled on, and the  horn  of Helm  was  loud in the "
"bushes, when Tom kicked the sparks up in Thorin's face. "
"Butterbur. 'That's just a thing that we're  short of, seeing how  we've only "
stretched  away  southward they could  not see in the failing light; but its 
"Angeline Hovey,4017953148624,20-07-1979
"
     Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui 
backwards in a convulsive leap. 
"guessing that you are the  Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the  great "
Imrahil's men. For  it seemed best to him to die  soon and  leave the bitter  
"Ewan Cadle,4041597010842,28-10-1987
"
ruffian and a highway-robber.' 
"came  hardly  to  the Wood-elves'  realm  were  there  slain,  or  drawn  in  to  die  in  the "
####- 
searching glance. Doubt was in the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo. 
"Dora Surgeoner,4041375698404,10-06-1982
"
"path made many bends, and at each  bend they  gripped their  sword-hilts and "
"not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, Jowyn! But I do not offer  "
Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful comrade?  
said at last. 
"     'So may one counsel another,' she said. 'Yet I do not bid you flee from  "
"####-stood close  to the point where they had left the  path, and it  swayed from "
"This  was  the  outburst  of  his  wrath  when  he  could  find  nobody  and  see  nothing, "
his pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky. 
"neek-breek,  breek-neek, unceasingly all the night, until the  hobbits  were "
that lie beneath the earth! ' 
     Suddenly  Frodo  himself  felt  sleep overwhelming him.  His head swam. 
"Down,  down  they  went.  The  dwarves  could  not,  course,  compare  with  the "
"with his back to the great tree, deep in thought; and Legolas stood alone in "
"eastern  spur;  but  a  few  held  on  their  way,  and  crossing  the  river  drew  near  the "
"""Great Elephants!"" said Gandalf, ""you are not at all yourself this morning-you "
"not lead  you into trap. He will go himself with father of Horse-men, and if "
moment 
at first.  By fortune the fires that had poured  forth in the great  turmoils 
"bubbling noise, and  a  long  venomous hiss. They wheeled round, but nothing "
"Moria,""  said  Thorin;  ""we  must  give  a  thought  to  the  Necromancer.""  ""Don't  be "
"     This  book  is largely  concerned  with  Hobbits, and from its pages  a  "
"make him crawl, yes, gollum!' "
"with light, and there was  held the highest feast that it had known since the "
"and that turned the dark head helmed  and  crowned  with  fear, sweeping the "
"Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo was fallen quiet and drowsy. Most of the tale "
"     ' ""That  may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,""  said  I.  He "
"Halfling,' he said. 'Yes, you have grown very much. You are wise, and cruel. "
was  beyond the  shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet  its  waters were dark: a  
"Karrie Hagart,4041598003617707,14-06-1984
"
Saruman is apt to  overlook his bargains. I should advise you  to go quickly 
shielded  from   the  east  by  the  Ephel  D®ath  and  yet  not  under  the 
"their  mouths, and  sent forth ringing calls, clear as notes  of a horn, but "
supposed the language was Entish  -- Pippin found the  sound very pleasant to 
beautiful.  They were clad wholly  in white; and the hair of the Lady was of 
"for any  assault in earnest   upon Mordor, so  long as it be great enough  to "
shield was dimmed. The new morning was blotted from the sky. Dark fell 
"     'Ah,' said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set "
"will help him more  than us,  if  it  is  that queer  little creature  that  is said  to be  their "
     In Elder Days before the fall 
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the 
they passed the ruined oak and turned and went on  down the hill between the 
"Aragorn gave to Faramir Ithilien to  be his princedom, and bade him dwell in "
"     `Give them this,' said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out a  "
more just then. But  I've been  thinking since. and now I'm not so sure. What 
they reported that some bore the white badges of Saruman. So suspecting what 
singing. 
     A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet! 
####-behind the stony wall at the pool's end. 
"     'Dangerous!'  cried  Gandalf.  'And  so  am  I,  very  dangerous:  more "
Road or in the country on either side;  but  somehow  he had steered all the 
"Frodo did  not speak,  and so Sam  struggled on as best he could, having  no  "
going  on. But Shire-folk have  been  so comfortable so long they don't know 
"Evie Partrick,4041373284105719,02-10-1989
"
"He slackened his speed  a little, seeking new foes,  and  his  knights  came "
"Goblins  might  be  about,  and  he  had  lost  his  ring.  At  last  he  stopped  by  a  low "
Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river -bank. The house at 
to a murmur. 
""
alone.' 
"     Frodo gave way; and  Gandalf, as if  he  were their esquire, knelt  and "
"and their folk would turn eastward, and so pass by the Redhorn Gate and down "
"     The  king mounted his horse, Snowmane,  and Merry sat beside him on his "
"Liza Algy,4017954236671518,25-03-1983
"
"Tyson Grime,4887838691963493,20-11-2000
"
 
"and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.' "
"before we  stopped, Mr.  Frodo,' he said. `Or maybe it wasn't a dream. Funny "
"people at once, for wheels and engines and explosions always delighted them, and "
quiet of the  world. The  oldest were planted by the Ents to try  and please 
     'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?' asked Merry. 
and eastwards from Osgiliath and the road to Minas Morgul. 
"Beverly Clissell,4041377644935,12-11-1984
"
"Gollum got up and crept forward again, muttering and shaking. "
"there have been no evil deeds.  All  is now ordered, as  you  see. And  your "
""
"moved in his sleep, and muttered some words: they seemed  to be in a strange "
"it as quickly as he dared, not to seen rude. Wizards after all are wizards. "
"people, as legends  tell, for they fell under  the shadow of Angmar. But all "
"""I  am  the  last man  to  undervalue  Bard  the  Bowman,""  said  the Master warily "
eyes glittered; he raised his mace to kill. 
"""Well?"" he said. ""What about your  promise? I want to go. You must show me "
"     'It is now a full hour past noon,' said Jomer. 'Before the night of the "
hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising  smoke  that showed 
corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.' 
"towards the  tower:  but  suddenly a light came in  the sky, and there was a  "
on the City. 
could be seen between their wings. 
overwhelming noise and sudden light. 
"Lars Tarbath,4041376970520968,06-01-1988
"
"Austen Sweeting,4041592175154524,14-10-1995
"
"from  the gates  of  Angband, and he died in  the arms of Tin®viel.  But she "
the stone. 
"yonder, so that a way will  be found.  But will good or evil show it to  me?  "
""
table where food was set for three. Faramir broke his fast with them. He had 
####-     Frodo shuddered. 'But why  should we be?'  he asked. 'And why should he 
"Dorey Robard,4041597433413661,24-04-2001
"
"     `Well,  I  can't abide  him,'  said  Sam.  `In fact,  I've  never taken "
"the book  or  to write  it again, he will pass over these in  silence, except "
     There shone for ever fair and bright. 
"Fran Peaseman,4041594539009,07-02-1983
"
"freshness filled the room, as if the air itself awoke and tingled, sparkling "
"Arabella Hall,4252837914475,18-11-1987
"
stiff at his sides; water and slime were dripping from them. 
mischief was done. 
'precious' was with him he would not fear any weapon at all. 
"agree with me, with  Grishnbkh their trusted messenger; and I  Grishnbkh say "
"what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don't know.' "
""
the Marish so as to  strike  the causeway from  the  Bridge above Stock. But 
"love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.' "
upon it for many miles about  us. Faint and far are the feet of our enemies.  
of the men  of  Gondor had made a  journey  in Ithilien more  dangerous than 
"down and down, and it was most horribly stuffy. The goblins were very rough, and "
bowed still lower. 
     the Silmaril as lantern light 
     A new  fear  was upon  them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At 
hobbit's  reappearance  and  of  their  scramble  down  the  stone-slide  and  of  the wolf-
"     Thereupon the herb-master enter ed.  'Your lordship asked for kingsfoil, "
"great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no  sign  of my "
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked 
have heard the echo of his last despair. But he has not gone without woe and 
"     'I galloped to Weathertop like  a gale, and I reached it before sundown "
gone?' 
"away,  and the white sun  shone, and  at his command the  vale of  Gorgoroth "
you.' 
""
"     Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was "
"Moria -from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Dbin to his gate. The "
"     'It's Rosie, Rose Cotton,' said Sam. 'It seems she didn't like my going "
"shadow of horror wheeled and returned, passing  lower now, right above them, "
"already  been left  at the Cross-roads,  it was with less than six thousands "
was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur's Bane. Plainly he 
"ones dodging  through big ones  and  joining  into  figure-eights, and going off like a "
fate had turned against them and their doom was at hand. 
"rest, we would let the night return.' "
"horses. Horns were blown  and trumpets  were  braying, and  the mymakil were "
upon the long  shingle-banks that lay under  the eastern shore.  They seemed 
"""Well! Here we are!"" said Thorin. ""And I suppose we ought to thank our stars "
the hand broke off; but at the  same moment the sword  splintered up to  the  
"and the  threatening towers on  the hills north of  the Road, in the country "
"So they put the gold in bags and slung them on the ponies, who were not at all "
"events went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name  and "
the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned from the noon and 
     Amid the world of woven trees! 
""
ourselves to last a life-time. But there  were  many other folk in Isengard. 
"Rooney Pevie,4041378849921,03-12-1999
"
hope to make one.' 
shadow; soon he would be lost to sight in that grey world. 
saw that Frodo was concealing from him some matter of great importance. 
"Heriberto Simonnet,4017955400333918,04-11-1999
"
"smoke them!' he said. 'The  Elves made them for  me, but I don't smoke now.' "
"was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full. "
"     Round the  fire  they  sat,  and those  that  were  not on  guard dozed "
"""I  can't  be  always  carrying  burglars  on  my  back,""  said  Dori,  ""down  tunnels "
"But now shall ride  him into great hazard,  setting silver against  black: I "
"hear no more. No welcome, no beer, no smoke, and a lot of rules and orc-talk "
"it's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?' "
and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.' 
"Sidonnie Gateley,4041379959539,27-04-2001
"
"now pushed out  some more waggons  that had  been  hidden in a field, and so "
     Not all those who wander are lost; 
"Friedrich Lewis,4041376198024,06-02-1992
"
"Felicio Maffei,4010370728001915,22-07-1980
"
"     `  ""I will do  that,""  he said, and rode off  as if  the Nine were after  "
     THE DOWNFALL 
forget that it is safer indoors!' 
"if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall "
"####-Silverlode into  a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak "
"answered  with  laughter.  ""It  is  drawing    towards  dawn,  and  you  have  slept  now "
renown. 
than a  furlong when the storm returned with fresh  fury. The  wind whistled 
"Olia Betts,4041594916014033,11-09-1993
"
"his horse  in, and halted,  swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and "
me? I can't leave him here.' Just then to his surprise a boy came running up 
"Ariana Ghelardoni,4041594660404729,01-03-1999
"
"     In the  Southfarthing the vines were laden, and the yield of 'leaf' was "
me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.' 
still could.  Outside there  was a starless blackness as Gandalf with Pippin 
"     'The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,' he said. 'Nothing  walks "
"one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the  "
"Brandir, that he would get up or make a move. "
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It 
"Reagan Pietersen,4041378860097974,03-03-1992
"
"     'Jowyn,  Jowyn!'  he  cried at last:  'Jowyn,  how come you  here? What "
took  to their paddles and  hastened on their way. The sides of the westward 
"""I  suppose  you  got  a  fair  price  for  that  cup  last  night?""  he  went  on.  ""Come "
"Brandywine (as the  Hobbits turned the name) became  Year One  of the Shire, "
"flags, and surrounded with  a crumbling battlement;  and in the middle,  set "
"Nye Workman,4041379395277958,22-12-2000
"
"said Gimli. 'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?' "
"look  that they now  bore was grave and benevolent, and a  little weary. His "
At 
gathering of the Riders. And then came the winged Shadow.' 
"under  Sun or Moon that I  have seen  for many a long,  long day. I shall not "
spread its great wings over the Emyn  Muil; upon which  the dark thought  of 
"that  grieves me.  No  houses  could be  fairer, for those who  desire to be "
"     'I followed you to shake off sleep,'  said Gimli; 'but I looked on  the "
"splintered and jarred their arms cruelly, and the steel heads broke or bent like lead. "
"with  Dain,  for  the  dwarf-lord  now  joined  them:  the  Goblins  were  the  foes  of  all, "
of the hidden caves. 
"years,' he said. 'How long will the day tarry?' "
"Carson O'Donovan,4041377899137215,10-12-1995
"
"Caesar Callaghan,4041590752965429,28-11-1983
"
"     He tarried there from errantry, "
"Florida O'Lehane,4017950341591005,20-02-1977
"
"Hatti Cathesyed,4017955805171,19-01-1990
"
"his eyes were clear. `I  said so, because  I purpose  to enter Mordor, and I "
""
"the red eye of wrath. But when I say  'free',  I mean  'free': free from bond, "
"""Half  a  moment,""  said  the  hobbit  shivering.  ""I  gave  you  a  good  long  chance "
"pint of beer to a friend, if they  lived  in  a hole with golden  walls. But "
"The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host  "
"journeyed mostly by night and  twilight, resting by day, and lying as hidden  "
"that gleamed and  flickered from the  narrow  windows for a while,  and then "
one of the dwarves 'in their hearts felt shame and pity at his going. 
"Goldwine, and Djor, and Gram; and Helm who lay  hid in Helm's Deep when  "
"""What about a little light?"" said Bilbo apologetically.  "
"Thorin spoke: ""Let us  try  the door!"" he said. ""I must feel  the wind on my face "
"Morris Pendrick,4041372214514099,30-11-1992
"
"and the fight was early in the New Year, after the heavy snow we had. "
"veiled their  feet,  and  mist  rose in the hollows. Away  in  the east  the "
Sam. 
     'Neither. But most surely  not  for any argument would he have set this 
"the  dead,  who  are many,  if  Gandalf  the  wizard  had  not  said  that  your  voice  was "
Wood-elves' home. In the meanwhile the barrels were left afloat while the elves of 
while fire would be some protection  for them all. It  was also his  plan to 
"master, whose wit is  greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach  me "
"     `If Elves could fly over mountains, they  might fetch  the Sun  to save  "
the  Elder Days that  are  now  lost and  forgotten.  Only  the Elves  still 
be cast yourself into the Fire of Doom.' 
"     At once they went on again. They crossed  the Bridge in safety, hearing "
"Gray Eltune,4196669395677,18-09-1996
"
"Master Samwise,' he said. 'But you shall see.' "
your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only 
"Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I have  looked  in  the Stone of  Orthanc,  my  "
"and  sad,  for  it  tells  how sorrow came  upon Lothlurien,  Lurien  of the "
"the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,' cr ied Gandalf. `Come along now! "
"Meara Amberson,4017958893760,14-11-1985
"
"the  borders,   as  Outsiders,  and  took  very  little  interest  in  them, "
"what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see  his  eye glinting.  "
"going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He  guessed it, but did "
"drive away  some passing  heaviness.  Unless,  of  course, you  give heed to "
"mortal man,  but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol,  a King  of Elves upon "
     ar sindanuriello caita mornil 
beside  the  birds.  The  news  of  the  death  of  the  guardian  has  already  gone  far  and 
"among them  had known, save he  alone, and only his will held them to go on. "
away  in  the confusion and save himself. Soon all  the  town would be deserted and 
"than a squirrel.' Sam pricked up  his ears at this.  'Yet if  so,  it  was a  "
"     'You seem  to know a lot,' said  Ugl®k. 'More   than is good for you,  I "
"hollow of his left breast as bare as a snail out of its shell!"" "
At  last  after  many  difficulties  he  managed  to  find  the  place  when  no  one  was 
"chamberlain of an upstart. Even  were his claim proved to me, still he comes "
"kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights "
Mark to  Eorl the  Young and  made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman 
"     'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree  threw me in! I "
"Merrick Trimme,4041374388021778,09-03-1975
"
"could work,  and  as the  years went  by, we  should open  up new  ways, and "
"roll off or no. And the less said,  the sooner I'll drop off, if you take my "
"brought; and behold! it was black, and if  there was any device upon  it, it "
and tall houses cast long  clear-cut shadows westward.  High in the blue air 
"gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, his toes found "
wrath. But many others were hurt or  maimed or dead upon the field. The axes 
his voice rolled like thunder. 
     At this point Sam began to listen  more attentively and pressed his ear 
"think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.' "
embroidered in white a tree blossoming like  snow beneath a silver crown and 
"best, and night changes many thoughts.  "
"fine view, no doubt, Mr. Frodo, but chilly to the heart, not to mention   the "
     But  the  horsemen  pressed  on  and  ere  evening  they  came  to  the 
     And the Saturday dish went off at a run 
"We will go that way, if we get a chance.' "
"but a servant, dwelt  in Angband  in the North,  and the  Elves of the  West "
"But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my mind that I heard them,  "
"     'Gollum,' said  Pippin. 'How  on  earth could they  be going about with "
"green. They were rather too large for him. He then  went into his study, and "
where the bonfire was made.' 
"Aldwin Palleske,4041598396364,15-01-1975
"
last he was riding  just  in rear of the  king's guard. There came  a check. 
"unwatched. His legs were  securely bound, but his arms were  only tied about "
####- 
"Gandalf answered angrily: ""I brought him, and  I don't bring  things  that are of "
down the bank and roused his master. 
""
to do? For now I am really afraid. What  am  I to do? What a pity that Bilbo  
"Signal going up, and the High Nazgyl going off to the war, and all that. And "
they were beardless and bootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble;  
"you must leave the Guard of the Citadel, and you must go forth from the City "
"was close  on  midnight,  and they had been drifting for  some while. hardly  "
""
against the stone. 
"that dwell far off. It is difficult to deceive him, and dangerous to try. "
"found himself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around. "
nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night came down from the mountains. All 
"     `If any dawn can pierce these clouds,' said Gimli. "
"forty miles from  the Bridge to Bag End,  but someone made the journey  in a "
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the 
"     Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. 'Well, I see  you have ideas of your "
####-itself. The name of Moria is black.' 
ahead a darkness began  to loom  through  the mist; and he guessed that they 
as  I  have  told  you  before;  and  he  also  liked  runes  and  letters  and  cunning 
tonight.  We've  got food in our bags.  Just give  us a room to lie down in. 
"knowing what  else  to  do,  poor  little Bilbo  caught hold of  it  and was pushed over "
of  the  Dike  charged  the  king's  company.  Down  from  the hills  leaped 
""
"Magdalena Aksell,4017954847662989,22-06-1995
"
"instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one "
still  more  luck  in  not  being  caught  in  the  tangled  boughs  and  matted  twigs 
"there is still time!"" "
     Life to the dying 
"Thorin's  dungeon,  far  down  in  a  deep  place  and  fortunately  not  far  from  the "
"####-This, of. course, in the polite and rather old-fashioned language of such occasions, "
"beyond  the mountains,  and  was  but  lately  returned to Rivendell  to her  "
"from  a  large  strong-box  took out a bundle  wrapped in  old cloths, and a  "
very near. 
"####-while to get his  troop under control, I've got  a chance.' A gleam of  hope "
with 
"""What have you lost?"" Bilbo persisted. But now the light in Gollum's eyes had "
wish there was a clear path in front of us: then I'd go on till my legs gave 
"eyes can see,' said Legolas.  "
"southern arm, near to the watch-post on Ravenhill. "
wood or a field.' 
     'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement. 
long walk.' 
"were brought  to  him,  and  at  once all hearts  were  lightened.  For  the "
accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!' 
"their  arms above  their hea ds, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind "
"Melina Corradetti,4291497354622,07-09-1977
"
"to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, probably  no more than "
"him,  and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot  and  wing  "
"least I wished to.  You  have frightened me several times tonight, but never  "
"     And there stood Meriadoc the hobbit in the midst of the slain, blinking "
"answered Jomer. 'We do  not serve the Power of the Black Land far away,  but "
"went mad  and  leaped  and  danced  and  flung  out  its  legs  in  horrible  jerks, until he "
the Stewards and set down their burden. 
"Voiceless it cries, "
     And melting water bubbling. 
"are looking,  or perhaps one  ought to say  searching,  for him or for me. I "
"tradition that  away over  there stood the Grey  Havens, from which at times "
Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We'll see about supper and things.' 
Legolas.  
any other way?' 
down. but  were  hastening to find  a side-passage  that  led back  to their 
""
     Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar? 
"His harp shall be restrung, "
"day high in  the  air flocks of  birds  had been circling, black against the "
"     'There are  various queer things living deep  in the Forest, and on the "
"armour of the Citadel, and they bore a great casket of black lebethron bound "
"Evermind they  are called,  simbelmynl in this land of Men, for they blossom "
"Nevins Leyden,4041593301765,05-05-1987
"
was  now  undoubtedly  hot  in  the  tunnel. Wisps of vapour  floated up and past him 
"     Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o, "
"     `Yes, He has only four  on the Black Hand,  but they are enough,'  said "
"Abby Shearmer,4041596134541309,10-11-1979
"
"Constantine Gorey,4041376038459175,04-08-1992
"
"us one day.  If we do  not return in that time, you will know that  evil has "
and left Jomer alone with the three companions. 
There was  too much of  that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing  into thin air; or  
"creaked, and still all was safe. Up came some tools and bundles of stores, and then "
"I  will  make you some toast. The bread is  three  or four days  old,  I  am "
"gold,  and  they bore  torches about  him, and  their flames,  pale  in  the "
     'Forth Eorlingas!' With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from 
"heard faint sounds behind  them, a stone falling,  or the  imagined step  of "
     Through woven woods in Elvenhome 
"without gear  or pack;  that, perhaps, is  like a hobbit. I say he, though I "
"""I would give a good deal for the feel of a strong drink in my throat, and for a "
"mention  getting  inside,  so  I  am  sitting  and  thinking."" But  I  am  afraid  he was  not "
power  to face the  Morgul-king-not yet. There was no  longer any  answer to 
"Rozanna Aubry,4815600764457,15-03-1979
"
"chair,  black and unadorned, and on it sat an  old man gazing at his lap. In "
"return out of  the  shadows  of  the past.' He look ed again  at Aragorn, and "
"it,  and  Elrond  could  not  do  so.  But  it  cannot  be  hidden from  the "
""
waned in every heart. 
"and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!' "
"knowledge of Men,' he added softly, regarding Frodo with a new wonder in his "
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river  
"streamed out of it. Above the arch  there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a  "
"They drank a little,  a clean, cold, sharp  draught, and sat down on a mossy "
have  done our  best in  a short time to make it  look  like home. After all 
""
from his 'house'. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter  of the 
"Sully Rucklesse,4041375671526,21-09-1981
"
I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria -- the 
"patches  grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous "
"Gratia Vaudrey,4041598895220206,04-06-1988
"
     'Then  what was  the use of bringing us to this  accursed spot?'  cried 
Thieves!  Fire! Murder!  Such  a  thing  had  not  happened  since  first  he  came  to 
"in  the lore of the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel-if he "
"hood; and a  third  stood fast in the gunwale of  the  second boat, close by "
"Shelley Mattacks,4041377234850480,07-12-1982
"
"through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil. "
"A live without breath, "
"we've stopped it once, we've stopped it  a  hundred times. So let 'em laugh. "
"Brendis Klimkowski,4041373425117425,18-05-1996
"
turned 
"Smjagol, yess, give it to us! Give it to uss!' "
would soon have  been at  a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many 
"stench. Her legs were bent, with great  knobbed joints high  above her back, "
     Then the hobbits suddenly realized  that people had looked at them with 
"winter.  For our spring and our summer are gone  by,  and they will never be "
"Lorita Cicconettii,4041592407936,08-04-1988
"
"too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?' "
"before  them, a mighty peak, tipped with  snow  like silver, but with  sheer  "
     'Where is Jomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead.  He should  return to 
"looking at the sky above their noses: these things are,  perhaps,  enough to "
####-outlying trees.  The land was beginning to slope upwards. ever more steeply; 
"news of the hobbits? Did you find them, and are they safe?' "
"trees, nor  even by  the  slender arrows of  elven-bows,  is  this  land  of "
a path along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.' 
the Hold. 
"came  ravening  and  with  them  came  the  bodyguard  of  Bolg,  goblins  of  huge  size "
"hard  and  solid  it seemed to  his touch  in a phantom world of horror, the "
"Kili  looked uncomfortable and stood on One  leg, but  the others made no pretence "
"ladder  of short  falls,  and  a   mist of foam  hung in the  air  about  the "
"were near  at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after  him  Legolas,  and the "
down along its course there  came a  plumed cavalry of  waves.  White flames 
"her beloved flesh. A shudder  went through her.  Heaving up again, wrenching "
"used  to  the  marches  and  the  treacherous  lands  between  the  Forest  and  the  Lake, "
"     'And the very last end of the War, I hope,' said Merry. "
into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men who know 
"decrease. We are a failing people, a springless autumn. "
"and  still  all  was  safe.  Up  came  Bombur,  puffing  and  blowing  while  the  ropes "
"Wolves, and upon  the other were Elves and Men and Dwarves. This  is how  it  fell "
of the  Elves for worse times ahead.  Six  days or more had  passed since he 
"Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he "
known. 
reverse my judgement! ' Still Gollum did not answer. 
 
while his eyes appeared not to see them or things about him. All that day he  
drew out a long red knife and spat on it.  Going to  the  parapet he  leaned 
"what you've heard here, then  I  hope  Gandalf will turn you into a  spotted "
"find and help me!"" For the moment his courage had failed together.  "
so  that I can only read went 5 days  ago. The last lines run the pool is up 
"Dorine Scrane,4179187992653354,08-05-1981
"
"Virge McKerlie,4017953408150673,23-04-1987
"
house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly. 
"him and saw the grave tenderness in his eyes, and yet knew, for she was bred "
"our  livings  as  best we  could  up  and  down  the  lands,  often enough sinking as  low "
Aragorn. 'These are Northern Orcs from far away. Among the slain are none of 
"The  Ringwraiths  are deadly  enemies, but they are only shadows  yet of the "
Isenmouthe. 
"culled two weeks ago at the least. I hope it will  serve, Sir?' Then looking "
"Carlyle Roust,4017950045468,12-01-1975
"
"Krishnah Boydle,4041379443480182,28-01-1979
"
finds 
"     'I have stayed already too long,' answered Gandalf. 'Time is short. But "
and schemed  for your part. I do not doubt that she has brought you this way 
"Price Pettett,4041376603097863,04-10-1982
"
so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down to the Gladden 
"Huey Wickliffe,4590446781649,21-11-1983
"
"     'You left the  East Wind to  me,' said Gimli, 'but I will say naught of "
"had held. 'He is burning, already burning,' he said sadly. 'The house of his "
had taken  leave of  Bombadil; and  they hoped and  half expected to see him 
northern end of the lake turned golden. 
storm that is at  hand - that and such  hope as  I  bring. For not  all  the 
"ago, Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazgyl, a spear of terror in the hand "
""
"It was! Trolls' purses are the mischief, and this was no exception. "" 'Ere, 'oo are "
ever he  missed the  unquenchable cheerfulness  of Pippin.  The  Riders were 
"took  her. Dragged her off  to the Lockholes, at her age  too.  They've took  "
"anxious  to  appear  friendly,  at  any  rate  for  the  moment,  and  until  he  found  out "
"see turf right up to the  walls, turf all pocked  with hoof-prints. Actually "
     `What in truth  this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom  of 
must  bear me now on a swift errand.'  Turning to Aragorn and Jomer  and the 
     'The Corsairs of Umbar!' men shouted. 'The Corsairs of Umbar! Look! The 
master stinks; the whole place stinks.' 
"Celinda Licence,4041594246696,14-11-1976
"
"left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that he persuaded "
guests.' 
"points little  rivers of red flame  came  hurrying on,  winding through  the "
seemed to them that above the ridges  of the distant  mountains another vast  
"also,'  he cried, and  turning  to  Elrond he  said: `The Wise may have good "
     One by one they  climbed down and followed Legolas. For  a moment Frodo 
up our trail then;  but I hoped that our stay in Lurien would throw  him off 
"not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will you!' "
"Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we  have reached the "
"     'When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's "
said.'  And  soon the word had  gone  out  from the House  that the king was 
"up and away toward the sky; brown and withered they  looked, as  if fire had "
     Aragorn  now  passed into the  citadel. There to his  dismay he learned 
"loose,  Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well maybe: "
"####-caught now. The  ruffians are on top, gathering, robbing  and bullying,  and "
"     Where the roots are long, "
"     `Not all  is  well  there,'  said Frodo, `but  certainly gardeners  are "
"     'I did  not give you leave to  go,'  said Gandalf sternly. 'I have  not "
"said he, ""that one of these was known to you on a time."" "
     Wake now my merry tads! Wake and hear me calling! 
"now seemed more remote, as if it were passing far above the clouds,  rushing "
"attentively  every move that  Gollum made.  The fens grew more  wet, opening "
"Ewan Treleven,4041590126636334,29-11-1994
"
"us  any more than they love Him, and if they get topsides on Him, we're done "
"was  not  one  they  liked.  Also  everything  seemed  quite  quiet,  both  outside  and "
"empty, and before the dais lay Thjoden King of the Mark upon a bed of state; "
secret of our journey is already betrayed.  But Minas Tirith is no nearer to 
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it  to his eye  and laughed.  For a  
but  the water was  too  deep  and  strong  beyond  the  rock  for me  to  cross.  It  is  easy 
they looked back in thought seemed to  them a place of peace and beauty. The 
played  on  our  soft  hearts  and  our  pleasant  fancies? What  sort  of  gold  have  they 
"to have escaped, when Smaug  smashed  the mountain-side, but I don't suppose the "
"miles, but  you shall have  rest at  the  end of it, and it will shorten your "
"thickets, and  a tumbled  land of rocky ghylls  and crags,  behind which the "
as of silver trumpets. 
"     There  was a terrific  splash, and  a  shout  of  Whoa! from  Frodo. It "
"     'Hm,  tired? No. I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do not "
help  from  there;  and  I  have  a  horrible  feeling  that  his  next  move  may  be  in  that 
beyond that  the  Ford of Rivendell. On  the  further side was a steep brown 
"Ingaberg Rhule,4017958422560,01-02-1996
"
"carry you -or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It  is then his business "
"pass!  I  must come  to  your  Lord Denethor, while his  stewardship  lasts.  "
felt about them the deep  and thoughtful quiet of winter.  It seemed to them 
"carried him far beyond his time, beyond friends and kin,  and the fields and "
"     'If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,'  said Aragorn. "
"     'Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search,' said Aragorn. 'Lands "
making 
"Shandy Waterworth,4017950626657513,19-11-1979
"
"anxiety, and  that he was  in  fact  finishing his other business  (which does not come "
"making."" "
"of the  Mearas, lords  of horses, and not even Thjoden, King  of  Rohan, has "
"""Who are you a-talkin' to?"" said William. "
"together. But I have ordered all  the Ents to remove  themselves from sight, "
may be weary before we halt.' 
"####-head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it,  "
The  dwarves  and  Bilbo  shouted  and  cheered.  The  rage  of  the  wolves  was 
     They  had gone  little more than a mile into the  forest when they came 
"for the  joy of battle was on  them, and the sound of their singing that was "
of the Lord of the White Tree.' 
"creature, but I have  him under my care for a while. But as for  us,  we are "
"this hill,  we shall find  a spot  that  is  sheltered and snug  enough, sir. "
"unseen opening, but  whether  that was so  or not, suddenly it was easier to "
     Though here at journey's end I lie  
"Dark  Years  ere the coming of the kings. But  beyond,  in the great fief of "
"green as young reeds, shot  with silver like beads  of dew; and her belt was "
"must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark is eager for his own house.' "
"that Saruman had caught them. Both Aragorn and Legolas, roused by his "
""
"     'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,' said Aragorn.  'Is it not said "
"     'I  have received  this,'  said Denethor, and laying  down his  rod  he "
"Ogdan Duddin,4041371253773780,09-07-1978
"
""
"was the stronger."" "
     They did  not have  to wait long. The orcs were going at a  great pace. 
"Dixie Ervin,4017951583756,12-01-1988
"
were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.' 
"have  no lack  of  water as you walk in Ithilien,  but  do not  drink of any "
"and  thought  and  thought,  until  his  head  nearly  burst,  but  no  bright  idea  would "
own. From the time of Gandalf's arrival he remained hidden from view.  
"only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made little imprint  in the "
fire and hid all  traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they  took  to 
"guards about them, and  scouts  rode out far ahead, passing like shadows  in  "
"counting  on his fingers. 'Fangorn,  Finglas, Fladrif, aye, aye,' he sighed. "
"is Herugrim, your  ancient blade,' he said. 'It was found in his chest. Loth "
He threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside it. 
they do not come  too  late.  There are evil days ahead.  To sleep  while we 
done.' 
"hills, or creep from sunless  woods,  they fly from us. What roads would any "
could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great 
"awake  and aware. He was smiling,  and there seemed to be  little wrong with "
"Di Sayre,4017951293233695,20-11-1976
"
the tents  of Aragorn that were set up on the field not  far  from the place 
the caves. A song of victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell 
chill lessen in  his  side  and arm;  a little  warmth crept  down from  his 
"     Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite of "
"     `I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,' said Faramir. "
"for it was  large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother  "
"spilled  in the Hallows, where that  is forbidden.  Also  you left your post  "
"     `He's really gone this time, I  fancy,'  muttered Sam. `I guess this is "
seen  still  happily  snoring  with  smiles  upon  their  faces.  The  wine  of Dorwinion 
"     'So passes Denethor, son of Ecthelion,' said Gandalf: Then he turned to "
great thudding and bumping. like huge rams dinning on the ground. 
at the rim with the high dark evergreen hedge. It  was smooth and  grassclad 
"grow smaller and almost sharp, 'what is  going  on? What are you doing in it  "
""
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!' He turned to Strider. 
"     At last  the day of departure came, and a  great and fair  company made "
twisted and turned. 
"as I can manage,"" said he. "
hills. Light gleamed in a window-slit. Its door was not ten yards from where 
wife  and Rosie to think of. These ruffians don't stick at nothing. But come 
"Kendall Wetherhead,4017950050831,20-05-1993
"
"     In  the evening  they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. 'Well, if you must  "
higher  regions  of  the Ephel D®ath. Dimly  the hobbits could  discern tall 
"guessed, though Gandalf  hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and "
"Gearalt Syphus,4041379614263268,10-01-1991
"
eyes were shining. And he  looked down upon her fair face and smiled; but as 
singer; and it's hard for little folk to escape  his cunning mazes.  But Tom 
doors lay back against the wall.  Through the opening a shadowy stair  could  
"him with me, but that wasn't allowed.' "
"For  your  hospitality  our  sincerest  thanks,  and  for  your  offer  of "
"Kleon Spowart,4041373563662208,12-12-1988
"
and share their wonder with me.' 
their  horsemen and riding their footmen to ruin.  But  wherever the mymakil 
"at,  yet  he knew,  somehow, that  they  were huge,  with a  vast stretch of "
"Gandalf,' he said. 'And then you stopped, because you said that such matters "
     There  was an  ancient highway that  ran  down  from  Isengard  to  the 
or what he is doing?' 
"have never dusted the mantel- piece!"" "
fitting words. I have done my best.' 
"staff  with a handle of  white bone; and now  the strangers  saw that,  bent "
     All that  day  the  outer  ridge of the  Emyn  Muil  had  been  bending 
weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make the Gate.  No! the 
"you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.' "
     Frodo had felt himself trembling as the first shock of fear passed. Now 
"Teodoro Zywicki,4017953007820,31-12-1998
"
     He found his hands had hold of naught. 
"down  lower,  and it began to rain heavily. They drew  the  skin-covers over  "
"     For eight dark hours, not counting two brief  halts,  they marched  on;  "
face under  great snowy brows  his dark eyes  were set like coals that could 
smoking a  short black pipe. As they approached he took it out  of his mouth 
"Leonanie Ealles,4041597406800,03-08-1977
"
 
soft words: I do  not hope to see you again on any other day under this Sun. 
"####-Baran,  the last  hill of  the northern ranges,  greenfooted,  crowned  with "
"the din of arms rose upon  high, with  the crying of men and the neighing of "
"     `Now, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'you shouldn't make fun. I was serious. ' "
"     'As to the  manner  of  his death, I  had  hoped that  his  friend  and "
spread over the land. A  few miles to the north-east the  foothills  of  the 
"naught  better,  nor queerer. But  I  won't deny I'll be  glad to  see  this "
     `Well!' he cried.  `We've done it! We've escaped from the Emyn Muil! And 
and I will speak. Let me be alone! ' 
hobbits. 
"their queen,  if my  desire be  not  granted? The Tree in the Court  of  the "
to Rivendell.  It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have  a  
""
"""You  put  your worst  cause  last  and  in  the  chief  place,"" Thorin  answered.  ""To "
"####-     'The first circle of  the City is burning, lord,'  they said. 'What are "
"Leonardo Redborn,4041590680666,02-08-2001
"
many things had been left behind. But without any light they would soon have 
"the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard,  in  the  end  of the "
again.' 
"through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire  is handy. "
"     The sun was  already westering as they rode  from Edoras, and the light "
"get  lost  in  them,  and  have  to  come  back  and  start  at  the  beginning  again  (if  you "
"on  far into the evening; for he felt  in his heart that  time was pressing, "
of the Nazgyl  the shadows of death fell dark upon the earth. Aragorn  stood 
"in  the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If  I were to "
"and foot, and yet  leave the City  in better defence  than it  was  when the "
"than I could afford. I found this, and I'm going to keep it."" "
to come back to Buckland. My  advice is: stay  there! And don't get mixed up 
"Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under  the trees. But "
"Christy Karlowicz,4017957534563,05-03-1986
"
"two steps, three steps-at last six steps. Maybe they had passed the dreadful "
say: do not weep; for not all tears are an evil.' 
     unt®pa Calaciryo mnri oiall. 
"     'You have not seen him,' Gandalf broke in. "
"distance with farmsteads  and little  walls, barns  and  byres, but  nowhere "
unshadowed 
awake long enough to eat a bit.' 
was blowing. Thjoden lay dying on the Pelennor Fields.  
"The sun was shining when he started, but it was as dark as night in the tunnel. "
"lightning,  struck  by  lightning!""  over  and  over  again;  and  that  was  all  they  could "
"Issy Corriea,4041598285450,20-02-1981
"
""
"     `Shelter!' muttered Sam. `If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof "
side sat Gandalf in a  chair of  carven  wood; and he seemed  at first to be 
"sheep.  The  dwarves  managed  all  the  preparations.  Bilbo  was  too  weak  to  help, "
"largish key, though no doubt William had thought it very small and secret. It must "
""
"escape  her  nets, they  say. These are  strange days! But if  you  have her  "
     'Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?' 
and swept above the dragon's lair :  
leave the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: 'I think I shall come 
"effort Frodo,  dropping  his sword, slipped  the Ring from  his  finger  and "
"speech).  ""I  am  Róac  son  of  Carc.  Carc  is  dead,  but  he  was  well  known  to  you "
courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning 
"     They went in single file, running like hounds on a strong scent, and an "
"""Ugh!""  he  said,  ""it  is  cold  and  clammy!""-and  so  he  guessed.  ""Fish!  Fish!""  he "
"     `You are not  wise  to  be glad of the  Yellow Face,' said  Gollum. `It "
"Tiffy Durdy,4017950934445718,27-04-1979
"
"Frodo. 'And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that "
weapons. But I will do what I can.' 
treasures he became wary of it and sat down on the floor; and he began to wonder 
"thick and threatening, and they had a chance to rest and draw breath. "
"     ' ""Where be you a -going?"" says she. "
"""Thinking  it  unnecessary  to  disturb  your  esteemed  repose,  we  have "
"     On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door, "
"""Lots!""  Bilbo  found  himself  answering,  to  his  own  surprise;  and  he  found "
trees and over  the black  tops of  those growing  lower down  they could still see  the 
     'Oh no!' said Merry. 'Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep for  
should  see  the  stone-paved roads  of  many  colours! And  the  halls  and 
patience. Battle is coming.' 
burrowing with his great arms rather than walking. 
"quest of the Company and from the Ring, enlarging rather on the valiant part "
"     ' ""Consider well, but not too long,"" said he. "
Chapter 9. The Grey Havens 
mountains' feet. 
all  to  flames. He  shuddered;  and  very  quickly  he was  plain Mr.  Baggins  of  Bag-
"more about dragons and  their wily ways, he might have  teen more  frightened and "
     'I hope so. But that is another  thing that  makes  me anxious. I  have 
"immediate danger did no t leave Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and "
     Soon after  six o'clock the  five  hobbits were  ready  to start. Fatty 
force.  They  must pass into the domain of  the Enemy far from  aid. Do  you  
"the name of Baggins to their minds,  especially  if there had been inquiries "
"respect. Only Gluin smiled, but his smile came from old memories.  "
"Scarface De Francisci,4041371898552,31-01-1998
"
""
"Prue Starmore,4017953034033376,29-11-1994
"
delight. 
"untimely  night, he  saw in  the middle airs  below him five birdlike forms, "
"things  were known  to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold  for a brief "
""
"     All Hobbits had originally  lived in  holes in the  ground, or  so they "
"here I shall still be forced to remain, for I shall soon have other charges,  "
"get  like shepherd, and shepherds like  sheep, it is said;  but  slowly, and "
call.  But so it  was  that I  came to Rivendell  only three days before the 
"doubtful if he ever did anything braver in cold blood, or more unwise. "
"was happening, a sack was over his head, and he was down. "
"louder they answered one to another, blowing fierce and free. "
 
     The guard stepped back and looked with  amazement on Aragorn. 'It seems 
"Prinz Blomfield,4403775738182,16-01-1996
"
double line of towering pillars. They were carved like boles of mighty trees 
as  a vast deep pit the great ravine at the head of the Morgul Valley.  Down 
"     'I  will,'  said  Jomer  lowering  his  blade. 'Bu t  wanderers  in  the "
     They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was loftier  
"array,  got  ready  to march  north  to  the Mountain.  It  was  thus  that  in  eleven  days "
"long lime ago. He seemed to remember  something sad about it, and would  not "
####-say much. 
"he said; 'and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we go. We  did some "
"     'Hail,  Lord of  the  Mark!'  she  cried. 'My  heart  is  glad  at your "
"garnets, and rich with gold was the helm upon his bony head face downward on "
lost and witless.  
"beyond, and the river was guarded by the Wood-elves' king. "
have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! How did it go?  
####-journey. Evil  dreams and evil  waking were blended  into  a  long tunnel of 
ever the Mountain drew nearer.  But as the  day wore on and all too soon the  
their  thin  grey  cloaks. For a moment he  might  have  paused  to consider  
"Stevana Allmond,4041592345904,06-11-1999
"
"Bradly Dummigan,4041597368771331,21-10-1995
"
"Perceval Mollon,4041371029026356,18-01-1990
"
"Snowmane wild with terror stood up  on high, fighting with the air, and then "
the  sword  of  Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap Thjoden  King?' he  cried. 
"came, they had attacked more fierce  than ever. Pippin did not remember much "
"would  all  have  done  their  best  to  get  him  out  of  trouble,  if  he  got  into  it,  as  they "
"     Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked  him up, put  a hood over  "
2. Concerning Pipe-weed 
"     Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and "
is not nearly enough.' 
old pony! Pah!' He spat again. 
"     and the Black Gate is broken, "
"Jan Zieme,4041376641023,24-04-1990
"
desire that was on him to run up the gleaming road towards its gate. At last  
"This came chiefly from a blazing  log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from "
tilling.  They  crossed the mountains north of Rivendell  and came  down the  
 
     'They cannot conquer for ever!' said Frodo. And then suddenly the brief 
he was. Amon  Lhaw it touched. It glanced  upon Tol Brandir he threw himself 
"Freddi Rediers,4041596669879,31-10-1992
"
     Soon  they were leading their ponies  in single file  over the  rim and 
open  door  and  went  on  talking.  The  talk  turned  to  the  dragon's  wicked  words 
"Lynett Trayte,4017951213016,17-02-1975
"
"your noble devices, and still more by  the fair  countenance of the House of "
"and caves and towers and golden trees, and goodness knows what besides. "
"Ebenezer Matches,4041596208504639,02-06-1991
"
"going into  the  common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me "
Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.' 
"""He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!"" said one of the drivers. ""Several of our "
"""Thank goodness!"" said Bilbo laughing, and handed him the tobacco-jar.  "
"forward, a tall man, taller than  all the rest; from  his helm as a crest  a  "
"Skippie Boase,4017958017659,19-10-1980
"
"Cinnamon Mustard,4041375073004,30-04-1986
"
""
"content. Many are my names in many countries,  he said. Mithrandir among the "
the hills straight towards the Mountains.  
     The Rohirrim indeed had no  need  of news or  alarm.  All too well they 
"     `Back,  back! ' cried Aragorn. 'Turn! Turn if you can!  '  He drove his "
"make a song about her. Beautiful she is, sir! Lovely! Sometimes like a great "
the jored to assemble on the path' and make ready to ride to the Entwade. ' 
"victory and defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames went  "
"Erinna Mitton,4017957404874,18-05-1989
"
"deep dark,  whatever change Wndfara  might forebode. Merry was riding "
Gimli 
""
"""Well,""  said  Gandalf  very  glad  to  see  that  his  tale  was  making  a  good "
and wounding themselves against it. 'So Treebeard went out into the ring and 
"suppose!""  he  said,  feeling  his  aching  head.  ""Well,  it  seems  a  very  gloomy "
"     Together we will take the road that leads into the West, "
William's eye. 
any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever  one comes inside one 
whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in  
came to me.' 
Grinds hard stones to meal; 
southern  airs and the moist winds from the Sea far  away.  Many great trees 
vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain-side. 
least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and 
the following message: 
bewitched  you.  Are  none  to  be  left to defend  the  Golden Hall of your 
"staring at  the sky, breathing deeply of the  fresher  air, saw  it come:  a  "
"Bernhard Clubb,4617961838486959,05-03-2001
"
before Gandalf as one amazed. 
     'Then those two went off and had a council  together in some corner. It 
"their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring "
"Genvieve Haughton,4041597153428,06-10-2001
"
"Bail Jeckell,4017956047520594,23-02-1976
"
many of them by some secret art burst into flame as they came toppling down. 
"delayed."" "
camp. A great host of Wargs ha d gathered silently and was now attacking them 
driven clean out  of my head.  I  shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to 
"turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill has wholly left me.' "
moment all else  between was out of  waking  memory. He stretched and drew 
     For a short way they followed  the lane westwards. Then leaving it they 
wondered 
"you k now the Gaffer  is close at hand, and he will be very well looked after  "
"     'We are likely to see other newcomers first,' said  Gandalf. 'Fugitives "
"     `We will not start until it is fully dark,' said Aragorn. "
"Morey Catlow,4041374921618783,21-10-1999
"
"like  a wounded  spider, in a heap of fallen  earth. Tom went back in again, "
"nearer they  became aware  that  these were of vast  size,  very  ancient it "
"Brady Hanson,4041591747209,11-03-1985
"
of Frodo's adventures.  
"     But under a tall tree I will lie, "
"horse;  and  on  it sat  a large man,  who seemed to  crouch in  the saddle, "
"night-speech of plant  and stone,'  he said. 'Come! Let us hurry! The others "
"     'I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago,' "
correct them. I  beg your pardon.  But  I have given  thought even to  these 
"Bilbo,  and to Bag  End in  the days while Bilbo was  still there. He wished "
"the raft-men of the king."" "
"of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that "
""
"and  anyway  he was  not much  good  at  skinning  rabbits  or  cutting  up meat,  being "
decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but we are going to 
"drum  from  the  hall; Bifur  and Bofur went  out  too,  and  came  back with  clarinets "
"     Far  over the  Great  River,  and the  Brown  Lands,  leagues upon grey "
"     Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the river  "
"rest.'  he said, 'and  sleep well. And you, Master Meriadoc, I  need no more "
"stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently  for  something, "
towards 
"oldest  in  the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed  the river, which "
"     with bird on bough and beast in den, "
same  evening. Then I rode  on  in  fear. I came to Buckland and found it in 
"of a steep hill into  another deeper and  broader  valley, and then over the "
"     'I  am called Strider,' he answered: 'and  though he may have forgotten "
"Bertine Gaspero,4041596655746,17-05-1979
"
for 
"     `What  can  I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do?  ' shouted Sam, leaning out "
     Slowly  Thjoden left his  chair. A faint light  grew in the hall again. 
"""Where are they? Killed, eaten, gone home?"" "
"Still  what of that?  We could  not use it to much  purpose, or without  his "
"like a bird,  nor  of trying  to walk like a spider. Not even my  uncle Andy "
"####-year, or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.' "
"Took I should say, and Mr.  Merry! How they have grown! Bless  me! But I "
"have had messages, even if he  could not come himself. When I returned, many "
"It was only a short way, yet they found it no easy task, for  Boromir was  a  "
"     `But what can I do? Not leave  Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on  the  top of "
"hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out. "
"eyes  into an orc again, leering and pawing  at his  treasure, a foul little "
"much lower, its edge notched and jagged with crags like fangs that stood out "
     'I? Nothing!' said Gandalf. 'I will do nothing  to him. I  do  not wish 
in  places  on  the  forest-floor;  but  what  made  the  noises  he  could  not  see.  The 
"     'Gibbets  and crows!'  he  hissed,  and they shuddered  at  the hideous "
"that grew in length and speed.  At last, less than a mile  from  the City, a  "
"sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of snow "
"####-     'l  observe, my good  Fangorn,' said Gandalf,  'that with great care you  "
the arts of Gandalf. His counsel  seems  not now so good as it did under the 
"here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We cannot go any  "
"grateful and you shall choose you own fourteenth, as soon as we have anything to "
his arm  he drew a knife and  strode towards the  bier. But  Beregond sprang 
"me and remember who is the real King under the Mountain!"" "
 
"     'Who are you, Master?' he asked. "
     A shining star by day: 
"until all above the Dike was  empty  of them, but below it they were  packed "
"they were very precious, but they were  so  patched and weatherstained  that "
"host will go back to the Forest. In the meanwhile farewell!"" "
"reminds me of, of  -- well, Gandalf, of wizards.  "
"were paved  with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in  it,  "
"""I never did. Tom said it."" "
"been reckoning,' he said, `and I can't bring  the  total up  to October  the "
"Rey Buzzing,4041594176363831,06-10-1994
"
"     Upon the hearth the fire is red, "
 
"would soon get from it, and wealth over and to spare with which to buy rich things "
deadly hurt.' 
"and the  other  lords, stood  upon the hill-top  and called; and down to him "
"     Gollum disappeared.  He  was away some  time, and  Frodo  after  a  few "
great vigour  in  the  waters  that come down  from the snows  of  the Misty 
"Cristal Usherwood,4041371849407,19-06-2001
"
"Barby Piwell,4041598512531,06-11-1999
"
"what is the  peril, the  Tale  of the Ring shall be told  from the beginning "
"High  mounds of crushed and powdered rock, great cones of earth fire-blasted "
"'than one alone. Well, here at  last, dear friends, on the shores of the Sea  "
"""What  d'yer  mean?""  said  Bert,  holding  him  right  away  up,  by  the  hair  this "
"Bridgette Henkmann,4041379036091669,03-01-1990
"
Here elf and elf-maiden 
"I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick  "
all unmanned.  Indeed  the force that  we lead east need not be great enough 
"strongholds north-away, between Cirith Ungol and the narrows of  Isenmouthe, "
"the Company Ganda lf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face "
"tattered clothes that  they  had journeyed  in, lying  folded  on the ground "
no  places for the living.  And why  do men  fight here in the  Hallows when 
"go  no longer. Road is forgotten, but not by Wild  Men. Over hill and behind "
"Helm's Gate Erkenbrand, master  of Westfold on the borders of the  Mark, now "
"saying  farewell, that I have  never even  considered  the  direction,' said "
"     But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an effort, when "
"fell and grim beneath, I deem' "
     Frodo  sprang  out of  the waggon to greet  him. 'So  there you are  at 
"neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever "
tend you  with especial care. You should  not  have risen  from your bed for  
and comes unlooked-for:' 
lake?' 
"The  dwarves  and  the  hobbit,  helped  by  the  wise  advice  of  Elrond  and  the "
"     'To that the Elves know not the answer,' said Legolas.  "
"     `Oh hasn't  he! ' said Sam rubbing his  shoulder.  `Anyway he meant to, "
"was  not  the  worst.  When  they  laid  him  on  the  bank  he  was  already  fast  asleep, "
"Melva Janecki,4041378063465,18-01-1980
"
Bilbo  put  out  his hand.  But Frodo  quickly drew  back the Ring.  To  his 
you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you  will see him before 
"should declare  himself first. Yet I am named  Jomer  son of Jomund,  and am "
     The news  that his master was still alive roused him  to a  last effort 
"     'No!' said Strider  interrupting, 'I do not think that tale  should  be "
"Roby McKune,4041376979150221,08-04-1995
"
""
to have been on his guard; but Smaug had rather an overwhelming personality.  
 
toppled backwards into the arms of his attacker. 
that they will hear of it befor e this night is over. Is that enough? You can 
"Suddenly Bilbo pointed: ""There  is  that old  thrush again!"" he cried. ""He seems "
Pheriannath  and knew that his title had gone down before him into the City. 
"     There was a faint stir  in the leaves, and  a cock crowed far away. The "
"them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you, "
     After that the hobbits heard  no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to 
"palace,  and  after  a  time  he  got  to  know  his  way  about  very  well.  What  was  his "
"Aline Brayson,4017950839027,24-02-1983
"
     And she said: 'I do not wish to play at riddles. Speak plainer!' 
"what I know, and leave the reward to  you. You may be glad to grant it, when "
"Krysta Jackling,4041598952984,21-06-1990
"
cradles. 
in  the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo's  spirits had risen  for a while 
though Elfhelm's company was away on  the right. Grimbold's men turned 
"Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was  elected every  seven years at the "
"Queen Arwen Evenstar first, and I  am ready to do battle on my own part with "
     A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT 
"Audrey Dudson,4666576366631,10-01-1976
"
leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun. 
"     'Aragorn,' she said, 'why will you go on this deadly road?' "
of leaves.' 
very welcome.  There  had  already  been  much talk  in  the  citadel  about 
light. 
"only a few  drops from their bottles-last filled in  the gully, which now as "
Riddles in the Dark 
"it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and "
likely neither of us will come back.' 
"fourteen. But of course, as you have guessed, he did  rescue his  friends  in  the end, "
"of  the ships had put off, seeking to escape down the River  or to reach  the "
####-nowhere  else  to be found in Middle-earth. You  shall come with me and keep 
"itself, was standing near  the bottom of a wide valley, so  that  from  its  top  the  trees "
""
"     'Lugb®rz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me, "
"singing, and laughing; for Quickbeam  often  laughed. He laughed if the  sun "
"Erick Butler-Bowdon,4041379357111468,06-03-1987
"
"clock, his hand jerked back, and the  packet fell  on  the floor.  Before he "
"driving us from Moria. And maybe that was  all their  purpose, and  they had "
his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as Frodo looked  at him he 
"     The light sprang up  again, and there on the brink of the chasm, at the "
"for  good, or  for bad.  And he had other troubles. For  there  was a  great "
     Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter! 
magnificent  than before;  and  at  the head of  a  long  line of  feasters  sat  a woodland 
"and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly  evil -looking. But there were "
seemed  dazzlingly  bright.  Really  it  was  only  a  leak  of  sunshine  in  through  a 
"     'Like, and yet unlike,' muttered Gimli. "
"was clad in stuff like green  and grey  bark, or  whether that was its hide, "
Aragorn now set the host in such array as could  best be contrived; and they  
"     'When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is, "
the rule of mere fighting men. Let 'King Bard' go back to his own kingdom-Dale is 
river towards the mountains.  The hobbits were left with the  Isengarders: a  
and the Riders  passed  in long files like dark shadows  of men and  hor ses. 
""
awaits you and your Master. Go!' 
"something to talk about for nine  days, or ninety-nine more  likely. Are you  "
silent for a while. 
"     'Nay!  One only,'  they  answered.  'The Lady Jowyn is  she, sister  of "
"yourself, now's the time to do a deal.' "
rose 
"the  ranks  of  the  goblins  of  Mount  Gram  in  the  Battle  of  the  Green  Fields,  and "
"house,' said Jowyn: 'grimmer, older.  Fey I thought  him, and  like one whom "
"     It was  dark. Deep  night had fallen. There  were  many clear stars, hut "
that receive them.' 
straight dreary streets of huts  and  long low drab buildings. About it  the 
"Chester Bragg,4041592735112,24-12-1989
"
"Mireielle Bartosinski,4041591066600,14-01-1996
"
They were  making for the main road; but  even as they ran they stumbled and 
"off again, almost  at a trot,  down what  appeared to be a long lane between "
and  suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have kept  the  title that he  took for  
"     'No, father of  Horse-men,' he  said,  'we fight not. Hunt  only.  Kill "
"round his master. No,  no song. Of course not, for the Ring'll be found, and "
"Perceval Wickmann,4041371179557,03-01-1979
"
"bridge the elves thrust their prisoners, but Bilbo hesitated in the rear. He did not at "
"on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for  "
"his duty, I fear, to withdraw you from the Guard; but  say to him that, if I "
hideous voice speaking again. 
"     'Treebeard and a few more Ents crept  on, right round to within sight of "
they with my Precious? Curse them! We hates them.' 
"     'And I too will go up,' said the king. 'I am old, and fear no peril any "
said. 
 
"hobbit and must have had either legs  or hands free, before he came  here. I "
"Karlotte Meffan,4942797356683221,28-02-1982
"
"     'But we ride on horses tall and swift,' said Thjoden; 'and great though "
"horns, horns. In dark Mindolluin's sides  they dimly  echoed. Great horns of "
"Heath McNicol,4041376551206,23-10-2000
"
find something that we could use ourselves.' 
"     'Rightly said!' cried Beregond, rising and striding to and  fro.  'Nay, "
"belonged to a  large  Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at least fourteen "
"Aldus Pummell,4041378201636,05-01-1979
"
"mountain-vales, and before that from Ithilien. But fear not! The visit shall "
"Shurwood Causby,4041379787070,30-09-1994
"
cries  and  howls  rent  the  air  afar.  A  few  brave  men  were  strung  before  them  to 
delighted in my life than when you spoke.  I feared that it was  a brave but 
"the sheaths,  black, set with small red gems. 'No orc-tools these!' he said. "
guts. You won't be a captain  long when They hear about all these goings-on. 
""
"low. They tried shooting at the squirrels, and they wasted many arrows before they "
"Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide "
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End.  At the end of the 
"twilight under  the trees they seemed  to be; and yet if they were moved, or  "
they heard the  water  dripping sadly  from  the dead branches into the  dark 
attempt has been made to provide information on a few points which attentive 
you can.' 
that want explaining. Why  were you delayed?  You  ought to tell me that  at 
"O! Whither so laden, "
"Krissie Beddoe,4041377028568,28-04-2001
"
know that runs at their feet; it will  bring us to Weathertop from the north 
come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of the alcove. 
"servants of  Sauron were upon the  Bridge, but  they withdrew  and I pursued "
"Isen flowed, already deep and strong before it found  the plains; for it was "
smiled rather ruefully. 'After  all that's what this party business  was all 
"####-up, and the reckless strangers were gone. "
     Done by! Gum by! 
"sick, but now  they were prepared  for the tending of men  hurt in battle or  "
"as  they  caught  the  main  stream  and  went  sailing  away  down,  down  towards  the "
or  in the fields. They were grim to look on; for though some  were  crushed 
our old alliance?' they said. 
"extraordinarily  thick,  often  stretched  from  tree  to  tree,  or  tangled  in  the  lower "
many fires must have been lit suddenly and by magic. And hark to the singing and 
indeed) had altogether failed to think of something clever.  
'And other roads he may find that Gondor does not guard.' 
"understand  now,' he said. `Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have  come in "
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks 
"appealingly  at Strider.  'His  wound was small, and it is  already  closed. "
"and silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle  glittered as if  it "
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had  happened. Frodo 
"Alvera Norcock,4041371246765372,12-02-1991
"
"true. A crack had opened at the back of the cave, and was already a wide passage. "
of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire 
"""They will be slain, and all our ponies too, and all out stores lost,"" moaned the "
"they call us, and now  they avoid us with  dismay and are  becoming hard  to  "
"and chill grey mists were about them.  Shadowfax stood  steaming with sweat, "
chant. Gradually the hobbits became aware that he was chanting to them: 
"song  of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same  name  as the stream  besi de "
trumpet ending on a long high note. 
"ended, save the Elves' waybread.' "
there  was  a  mighty  twitter  in  the  branches.  William  never  spoke  for  he  stood 
"     The leading company rode off as swiftly as they could, for it was still "
"not through yet, and it is a long way down to the  Gates  that open  on  the "
"Lexine Wreak,4041590551560,13-01-2001
"
"     'Yes,' said Pippin.  'Well, yes, well enough for my  own people. But we "
"sleep in peace.' Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary, as those who have "
said Aragorn. 'Did I not say so at the Hornburg?' 
us.' 
"black-feathered and barbed with steel, but the point was painted red. "
"looked on Jowyn's fair head, as  she lay and did not move; and  he looked on "
"Ulrich Gymlett,4017953354230,03-04-2001
"
"skirted  the foothills for a  mile or so, until bending south it passed back  "
"     'I am with you at  present,' said Gandalf, 'but soon I  shall not be. I "
"Birk Merlin,4570237303985,29-01-1982
"
seemed  to  be  busy  removing  the wall. But  all was deadly  still. There was no  call 
####-of Mordor dimly showed. As they threaded their way among the hideous  
"Enriqueta Meriton,4017956443800954,31-01-1984
"
"bearing one  aloft; and Elladan with  another went  at the rear, and  Gimli, "
there was  no sound  of pursuit. 'I  don't fancy  he  would try bringing his 
     'Drownded?' said several  voices. They  had heard this and other darker  
standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the Elves.  
will  have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is 
"     'Then make  haste to declare yourselves and your errand,' said Faramir. "
"to go up and  stand  there  so long.  For the black horses  can see, and the "
the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo  off his  guard. And I daresay 
had carried off many unlabelled ones. 
"and  fell  in  a  faint  on  the  'door-step.'  The  dwarves  revived  him,  and  doctored  his "
"Mithrandir,' said Faramir,  `and not gone on  to  the fate that waited above "
the strokes of Mordor?' 
"Jessy Oman,4041377793245,09-12-1981
"
"whether  he knows about them or not.  I am  glad that   I know about them,  a  "
and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half expected to  see Gandalf 
cried out with many voices. 
They chased me all the way to the Ferry. I have never got over the  fright  - 
"appeared that he was nobody's friend, and nobody could recollect when he had "
"gave  a  shout  and  slashed  at  the  spiders  in  front  of  him.  They  quickly  gave way, "
"They held their great shields  above them like a roof, while in  their midst "
"Godfree Ozanne,4131277024071266,03-11-1982
"
"Lem Broggelli,4041599758208502,04-08-1995
"
"     He  sprang  away, calling Shadowfax  as  he ran.  Aragorn followed him.  "
     In the next day or  two Frodo went through his papers and  his writings 
"Meryl Charnley,4041375984234,11-09-1990
"
"But they had not yet overthrown the siege, nor won the Gate. Many foes stood "
him  and  he  had  a  chance  at  once  to  try  his  desperate  plan.  He  followed  the  two 
"Skipper Gouldstraw,4079178126089020,06-11-1979
"
"was still  some store of  weapons in the  Shire, these were  used  mostly as "
"Lil Guiu,4857433679131630,19-06-1992
"
"####-parlour. This is what he heard, Gloin speaking: ""Humph!"" (or some snort more or "
what they were  about.  But how did  you  know that they  were  in Gandalf's 
they could not possibly go on with their journey leaving Mr. Baggins in the hands 
"     Sam took a deep breath. `The Riders are a bout again, up in the air,' he "
their shining eyes stirred and kindled as their thoughts went to and fro. 
until at least ten days be passed.' 
"Smaug  lay, with wings  folded  like  an  immeasurable bat,  turned partly on one "
"were  trapped, and soon. all about  the grey mounds where they stood, forces "
"Amber Linstead,4854842189777802,26-01-1977
"
"Carly Halvorsen,4301721429783,19-01-1995
"
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go 
"Frodo, he  bore  the sword and the elven-cloak and the mithril-coat that had "
Till the end of the dark 
'Others  will  occur to  your  thought.  Your  servants  are  destroyed  and 
"and long afterwards he interpreted  them, as well as he could:  the language "
     After a while  they plunged into  a deeply  cloven  track  between tall 
break 
"Robinson Button,4041370738435700,02-08-1999
"
"to grow any more, save sideways.' "
"the King, and together they went up into  the  High City,  and a ll the stars "
"yet something told them that there, far below, were Black  Riders assembling "
jewels in the  depths. Then  once more she wished them  each  good night and 
greycloaked.  Hiding a power that yet she felt.  For a moment still as stone 
"voiced fellow ran hotfoot to the Master. ""The dragon is coming or I am a fool!"" he "
"almost   his  only  duty   was  to  preside   at  banquets,  given   on  the "
"So dwarves shall die, "
     Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. `For my part  I 
"almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or  "
"reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?' "
     Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think about. For  
"back again, as if he were on a road. "
Goldberry is wait ing.' 
"Barby Leadbeatter,4390461211832,22-05-1984
"
dwarf-boots in muddy  weather. But they were well known  to  be Stoors in  a 
further fr om the Shire than that.  It is thus quite possible that he learned 
"jewels, you know, from men and elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; "
"     'That is true,' said Legolas. `But  the Elves of  this land  were of  a  "
he was laughing. 
"that  Boromir,  the  proud  and fearless,  often rash, ever anxious for  the "
they have no place. Begone now ere our arrows fly! And if you would speak with 
"     'How do I feel?' he cried. 'Well, I don't know how to say it. I feel, I "
"standing by  the  bed.   'Poor  old Merry!' cried Pippin, and  he ran to  the "
"you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting "
almost as  steep. A golden  afternoon  of  late sunshine lay warm and drowsy 
"those who know our tongue and are our friends,'  replied one of the  guards.  "
where the Forest River flowed into the Long Lake. 
"the boat  close behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat  in  the bow  looking "
"Stephine Galbreath,4670435162009,25-12-1990
"
despairs of life.  But  from my word  and your service I do  not  wish to be 
"     Gollum would not move. He stood shaking and gibbering to himself, until "
on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `poor little Smjagol'. After  
"     `So it  was  that when summer  waned, there came a night of  moon,  and "
"Ram Weadick,4041371711001352,19-06-1997
"
"Corby Giamitti,4352773064573015,17-07-1985
"
"should not sing any  more  at present. Wait till we do  get to the edge, and "
guess.  And  now they turned their eyes towards the archway  and  the ruined 
"in  a  hurry,  and  before  the  spider  knew  what  was  happening  it  felt  his  sting  and "
why 
"Halfling? Jomer, you shall make him a knight  of  the Riddermark, for he  is "
"too long in making up his mind, and now it was no good. How could he escape, "
passing through long dry aisles carpeted with a deep prickly mould. 
     So Sam planted saplings in all the  places where specially beautiful or  
"     As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowed "
of  the living world came up and swept the fumes and smokes towards the dark 
"tunnel, pulling and dragging in their bundles, when Smaug came hurtling from the "
dwarf-runes and secret marks. 
"and leisure to make beautiful things just for the. fun of it, not to speak of the most "
"Ring has already passed through it unscathed,  and even unheated.  But there "
"     'It  was made, and it had not been destroyed,'  said Gandalf. 'From the "
"Noami Dechelette,4234647041358605,29-03-1998
"
"the  downs, then along the  river to the forest. And we march day and night. "
####-in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety. 
"backwards, clutching at  the  orc as it  stumbled over him.  Before he could "
over them. But most of the paths were cheats and deceptions and led nowhere or to 
####-     Now the  cries  of clear strong voices  came ringing over  the  fields. 
"from his shoulders. `For the  gifts that you have  given me I thank you,' he "
rose and went slowly down the  winding road; and even as they passed towards 
"ribbon beneath him, and the  Misty Mountains stood small and hard  as broken "
"Brandybucks, for the use  of guests, or members of the family that wished to "
"time  to  lose.  Before  long,  as  Bilbo  knew,  some  elves were  under  orders  to  come "
"that  whipped  you. Broke his neck, it seems, in his hurry. Now you draw  up "
"But it seems that the wind is setting  East,  and the withering of all woods "
"     By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter, "
father. Even  as the Nazgyl had swerved aside  from the  onset of  the White 
""
"And  as for you ,  my dear friends, you will need no  help. You are  grown up "
"rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away "
"     'I can't say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for me; "
so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned or fallen asleep again. 
"his hand, as though dazed. "
"the night, none saw them  pass,  save the wild creatures; or here  and there "
"law to let strangers wander  at  will  in our land, until the  king  himself "
"Ambrose Slipper,4582502779290652,25-07-1994
"
"Sam was walking home  and twilight was fading, there came the once  familiar "
"be caught helping us; and rather than let his  Precious be melted, maybe. At "
service.' Two  men had  come softly up the  stair and stood now a few  steps  
sprang  over the stone  and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face  was 
"Eduino Sobczak,4542854990931,16-04-1993
"
"of tables, carved of marble;  and upon each table lay a sleeping form, hands "
thought they  could hear water  gurgling in  its  depths. It curved  away  on 
thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully 
"wound back out of sight.  Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint "
"the sun  rising red  behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the "
"     Frodo now led the way, northward as near as he could  guess,  among the "
"saw that  there had been a frost  in the night, and  the  cobwebs were  like "
caged beyond great need. A snake without fangs may crawl where he will.' 
     'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound 
"""Now what on earth or under it has happened?"" said Thorin. ""Certainly not the "
in the great events of that Age that are here related. 
"football."" "
"the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir has taken "
"back, you'll see. The promise will hold  yet a while. And he won't leave his "
coat; he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.' 
siege.' 
"     Huge, old, and tall. "
"Phillida Sheldrick,4017955016008466,15-11-1993
"
"     'And yet'  - he paused and stood up, and looked round, north,  east, and "
"Men were unfaithful, strange and unlovely though they might appear. "
The bannocks are baking! 
"thick -set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had "
"he not of  the children of  L®thien? Never shall that  line fail, though the "
""
cup or basin of polished bronze; and a goblet of plain  silver was set by the 
"of  the  topmost  boughs.  Gandalf,  who  was  a  good  deal  taller  than  the  others,  had "
"it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say. "
""
"could probably have  betrayed us to Orcs many times since we met him. No, if "
"monsters, half-burned, or broken by stone-cast, or shot through  the eyes by "
"""S-s-s-s-s,""  said Gollum more  upset  than  ever. He  thought  of  all  the  things  he "
movements of the Enemy and his allies; and he told of the  fight on the road 
"wall;  but still Gandalf could  be seen,  glimmering in the gloom; he seemed  "
"the job then I must do it. But I would dearly like to see Bywater again, and "
"encamped was near to Henneth  Annyn,  and  the stream that  flowed  from its "
"Laurelindurenan  it  was named of  old, but long now it  has lain beyond the  "
"branched right, winding  through a  wood of ancient oak-trees on its way  to "
"with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry, and  low tough thorns, though "
"     'Receive it,  lord!' he said: 'in earnest of other things that shall be "
"hearts and  desires. Now why did  not we wish for some  of our own kinsfolk, "
footfalls of  Aragorn with his  long stride.  When they halted  for a moment 
was the sound of creatures  crawling and snuffling.  He felt sure they would  
and ink -bottle. Milo never answered letters.  
mountain  of  gold  can  amend  it. Yet  I  am  glad  that  I  have  shared  in  your  perils  – 
"Stringing the bow  and  fitting an arrow  he turned, peering back  over  the "
     Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was 
the hills;  and  to  their  right  a  grey river  gleamed  pale in the  thin 
"with axes, and heavy  hammers, and  long knives, and stout staves: and a few "
"left my pocket-handkerchief behind, and I haven't got any money. I didn't get your "
"happily ever afterwards  to the end of  his days.  It is a  good ending, and "
found their path blocked by a running water. It flowed fast and strong but not very 
"said. `Leaves out of the elf-country,  gah! They stinks. He climbed in those "
filled with gr eat store of arms and victuals.  
     Meanwhile the hobbits went with  as much speed as  the dark and tangled  
""
""
"Below, my lad! "
moment!  We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman  that this dainty is not for  
"beyond  the  murmurs  of  the  dwarves,  for  any  whisper  of  a  movement  from  far "
"Kermit Simonetto,4065594792693604,03-04-1979
"
"Herbie Rosas,4041597853142,16-06-1981
"
"the end. But that is near. Follow whom you will,  even the Grey Fool, though "
"Mick Kaiser,4017956900594918,04-11-2001
"
"Nester Haime,4041596970879821,02-11-1978
"
"Elves, Tharkyn to the  Dwarves; Olurin I was in my youth in the West that is  "
something  to  do  he  took  to wandering  about  the  Elven-king's palace. Magic shut 
opened to the East. He sighed and shook his head. After a pause  she  turned 
"Mr. Bilbo's  tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters  - meaning no harm, "
"thick  round  the  door,  and many were  going  in  and  out-not even wiping  their  feet "
though you seem to be going back nearer to their strongholds; for that is what they 
Scuttling as fast as his legs would carry him he turned the last corner and came 
"     'Nay! It's not one of them ruffians,' Sam heard the farmer say. 'It's a  "
were  trembling as they clutched the carven wood. White they seemed now  
direction.  I  wish  to  goodness  I  had  never  said  that  about  Barrel-rider;  it  would 
"Ruthy Le Marquand,4017952811937726,17-02-1981
"
"me before all is over. Whatever did you want to go and drop him for, Dori?"" "
"Karyl Le Gallo,4041594557472,15-07-1989
"
"     'We must walk open-eyed into that  trap, with courage,  but small  hope "
"     She tightly fled on dancing feet, "
"     I  think really  he preferred slipping off quietly  in the  end,'  said "
"before  that  he  has  more  about  him  than  you  guess,  and  you  will  find  that  out "
"     Proudfoots,  repeated Bilbo. Also my  good  Sackville -Bagginses that  I "
"Steffane Scanterbury,4041596398560,14-01-1998
"
south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? ' 
approaching thunder. 
"Glorfindel.  'Elrond received news that  troubled him.  Some of my  kindred,  "
"Bree-folk were  sympathetic, but plainly  not  very  ready to  take  a large "
to war with Gondor or  the Mark; but  now they  are troubled by the darkness 
you 
"thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the  hand. Packs close too, and as "
"Irwin Codeman,4017954187598827,27-03-1991
"
"Adrienne Morton,4041375437382319,22-05-1992
"
knife on the floor. 
that was good now festers in the  tower. Still  for us things have  not gone 
"was rightly guessed that I could not forbear to redeem the Arkenstone, the treasure "
"     Aragorn strode  on  through  the  inner court,  and  mounted to a  high "
"surrounding horsemen.  He  then stops, while still in the open, and cuts his "
"durstn't. Goblinses down there. Lots of goblinses. We smells them. Ssss!"" "
"green grass of the downs I have loved you , and that love shall not fail. But "
dead of night before Gandalf left us.' 
"Henryetta Oxtaby,4041371179748,16-08-1984
"
"contrived. When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer him the service of "
"Scarface Chadney,4017958227787,12-04-1981
"
"     'So much for your  Big Man,' said Merry. 'We'll see the Chief later. In "
"had  forgotten  that he had had  at  least one good meal more  than  the dwarves,  and "
"dwarf, as he had no beard. "
"note until after 10.45 to be precise."" "
"for close on an hour, testing them now and again with  his fork, and tasting "
     'Gandalf!' Jomer exclaimed. 'Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but 
"So  Gandalf  gave  a  long  shrill  whistle,  and  presently  Thorin  and  Dori  came "
"beyond our reach  at pr esent,' said Aragorn. 'Yet I think I shall mention it "
tilled  by  the  slaves  of Saruman;  but  most  of the valley had  become a  
But 
the  arms  of  the Mountain. Out  of  it  the waters  of  the Running River  sprang;  and 
####-and learned much of  his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news 
"     'Well met, I say to you again. Legolas!' said the old man. "
seemed to them that Gandalf had never spoken so  fair and fittingly to their 
beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere  the shade of  night  falls we 
"feast. His head seemed sunk  in sleep on  his breast, and a fold of his dark "
"sneaking back, you old villain? ' "
"and he found that none of his  family could see him, when he was wearing the "
them welcome. 
"     And up and down he runs his bow,  "
"passing, when the scouts  began to  return. Some  had  gone north beyond the "
climbing path. 
"at him unhappily.  'It all depends on what you want,' put in Merry. 'You can "
""
thick 
The moon is far whiter 
that if I do not burst. it will be a marvel!' 
would not do at all. 
     Hey! Come merry dot! derry dol! My darling! 
"their  heads  they  passed  through  the  gaping  doors,  not  without many  a  backward "
"according  to his wish and need, but especially  that one of the little folk  "
would only have made matters worse.' 
Company was busy with his own thoughts.  
"     and melodies they taught to him, "
"almost dark. Why had his master let him sleep  on out of turn, right on till "
""
"     'No, indeed!' said Pippin, trying  to sound cheerful, though  his heart "
cheerfully. Under  the  morning  sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of 
"out. The  end comes, and then  drums, drums in the deep. I wonder what  that "
     More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men. 
"     He  stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish song "
the  cavernous  roof. For a  moment the orcs  quailed  and the  fiery shadow 
""
     Pippin  sat  miserably  by  the door in  the pitch dark; but he kept on 
"     There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken  by "
like being roused; and we never are roused unless it is clear to us that our 
"Marys Marchetti,4041378759369021,25-04-1980
"
"""I  thought  as much.  I  see  I  have  some  information  you  have  not  got.  Dain,  I "
down the few Orcs that had escaped and still had strength to fly. 
you bring. 
"the dwarves go  as  fast  as  ever  they  could,  sick  and weary  as  they were. The king "
"walls. But arrows are no  use against Ents. They hurt  them, of  course, and "
""
him back. Nothing would. They had better both be dead together. And that too 
"     'It is,' said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to "
"the people of the Elvenking, whom I remember with small kindness. In this debate "
"in it are dominated by ORTHANC,  the citadel  of  Saruman, and  the fortress "
"Ted Gifkins,4041371887023644,10-02-1995
"
"Kennie Pruckner,4041376347878,07-06-1978
"
"     There  was a sudden deep  silence, in which Frodo could hear his  heart "
space of days it seems since I rode west;  but never  will I lean on a staff 
     'Escaped?' cried Aragorn. 'That is ill news indeed. We shall all rue it 
"     Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! "
     Chapter 3   The Black Gate is Closed   
"through the village,  and four more  invaded the Shire. But when these  were "
"     This many a year has Tim been gone, "
"Isengard is a  circle of  sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with  a wall, "
grow worse as the year fails.' 
"mountains towered up, nearer and nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose "
"that the  kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangor n my friend. But now come "
"The trees like torches biased with light, "
"""Well, let him!"" said Bard. ""Such a fool deserves to starve."" "
It heals my heart to see thee now in bliss.' 
"     'There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay "
"mist before his eyes had  darkened,  and he  felt  that a  shadow was coming "
"     'I thank you, Thjoden King,' said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw  back  "
"islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from the shadows of the banks. "
"with doubt and fear. Sam frowned,  and looked at his  master; and at last he "
"and further away from the dwarves, if he could; to make them curious, excited and "
bewuthered-this  was  the  most  awkward  Wednesday  he  ever  remembered.  He 
""
"Cary Faas,4041591063328745,12-04-1982
"
renown. Then the king followed with Jomer on his right. He had said farewell 
     To his dismay Sam realized that he  had not  got an answer  to this. He 
"     'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim "
"very suspicious  of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe "
"gave understanding of tongues,  or simply  understanding, especially  of the  "
on Aragorn most of  all her eyes rested.  And when  they sat at supper  with 
"bowed very low. putting  his  hand upon  his breast.  Then,  seeming not  to "
"     'He  won't hurt you,' said Frodo,  hardly able to keep  from  laughing, "
     Peel it! Heal it! 
"Yancy Biddell,4017959327014544,20-12-1979
"
"walls, polished  and smooth  as  glass, flashed and glittered.  Three  other  "
' 
"of rock he fancies. Why, there isn't even a bit of moss! ' "
"     'His message is less bad than that, if not good.' said Pippin. 'He says "
 
"filled with a hideous lust and rage; and before it stood stern,  untouchable "
"of  the  goblins,  without  trying  to  find  out  if  he  was  alive  or  dead,  and  without "
"Osgiliath, and  Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What  hope have you for that "
more walk round walls of Stone-houses.' 
"Jamie Krysztowczyk,4041591881891,06-03-2000
"
"Kendall Exall,4041379783319,17-11-1994
"
"of  Doriath .  I  have  seen  three ages in the West of the world,  and  many "
sight behind them; but  they had hardly begun  to breathe  more freely again 
"can spare  you, so that you and I can go off together.  You can't go  far or  "
"comfortable  father,  got  something  a  bit  queer  in  his makeup  from  the Took  side, "
""
"strenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection  looked rather flabby, "
He felt a desire to strike him. 
with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came  to a  
"     'Don't kill us,'  he wept. 'Don't hurt us with  na ssty cruel steel! Let "
"that we are at  his gates and  would have speech with him, if he will permit "
Weathertop; and  it was then drawing  towards  evening and the shadow of the 
as  many  as  the  boat  will  hold  at  a  time.  After  that  Kili  and  Oin  and  Gloin  and 
Those  lands  had  changed  much  since  the  days  when  dwarves  dwelt  in  the 
"####-They seized him quickly, in spite of their surprise. ""Who are you? Are you the "
did 
"Rubi Bassford,4041593516883,29-10-1981
"
off no sense in killing two with one fall.' 
""
"     'Five leagues or  one,' said Gimli; 'we cannot escape them in this bare "
"Already  the  shadows  were  deepening  about  them,  though  far  away  through  the "
"old Treebeard standing, motionless, with his arms raised above his head. The "
"said Gandalf. 'He  hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved  himself. He "
"to  go without me and all. If I hadn't a guessed right, where  would you  be "
"did he mean to turn and seek for some way to take him east, east on the last "
"there are more  lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is very hot  there, and "
bared their heads and bowed; and they passed through the ash and fume of the 
"Rohan made ready, and rode off by the North-way, and with them went the "
"     'Nay, lady,' said  he, 'I am  not astray; for I walked in this land ere "
"Gifford Van Ross,4041378172571377,18-05-2001
"
"there,' he cackled. `Always there. Orcs  wi ll take you all the  way. Easy to "
"sides towards his foes, seeking only to set their town ablaze. "
"     'Then we must go  in, too,' said Gimli. 'But I do not like the look  of "
     `Then  why do these black  horses endure such riders? All other animals 
"claim  as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch has not yet "
"Houses,' said Aragorn. 'Will you not open your mind more clearly to me?' "
background of the grey-green fields; even  in the cool  sunlight  of mid-day 
Under the Mountain dark and tall 
two 
"safe for you to have a wink now, master.  Safe, if you lay close  to me. I'd "
"Carce Banyard,4017954194130,27-05-2001
"
Gandalf were  here! How my  heart yearns  for Minas Anor and the walls of my 
""
way.' 
"Norby Brierly,4017957196785,06-05-1999
"
"are allowed  to  leave  Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave  it  "
"     So now the Lord Faramir had gone  forth again, and had taken  with  him "
"of Snowmane, digging in its claws, stooping its long naked neck. "
father  in the tomb  where  he was  laid.  But since things must now be done  
went  on the gully became ever shallower and  the slope  of its  floor  more 
"Annecorinne Merdew,4017955827688,23-02-1977
"
"Ronni Tregea,4041374042828,17-11-1996
"
     At  that moment Pippin  saw why some  of the  troop  had been  pointing  
"fine as  frozen  clouds; spears,  banners, pinnacles  of suspended  palaces!  "
"would not argue. Smaug will be coming out at any minute now, and our only hope "
"all dark  holes, and in past days he had  bowed  and worshipped her, and the "
my orders.' 
"but the  Orcs did not halt. Both Ugl®k and Grishnbkh  shouted, spurring them "
     When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas seated  with 
"     `The D®nadan,' said Bilbo. `He is often called that here. But I thought "
"Edithe Morrall,4490758841547,05-07-1986
"
"remained Aragorn sent one of the D®nedain,  and  they comforted the captives "
say. You ought to have brought five hundred burglars not one. I am sure it reflects 
right hand in his and  felt it  warm with life returning. 'Awake! The shadow 
"Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you  should  ask about  him.' But  at "
hunting Orcs.' 
boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.' 
"####-without need. And  he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so "
reported it.' 
     `What for? ' growled Gorbag. `Haven't you any lock -ups down below? ' 
"Corbet Siburn,4041596511238958,24-05-1990
"
the Entwives;  but  they looked at them and smiled and  said  that they knew 
distant glint like pale glass where  the Brandywine River  made a great loop  
"these ruffians, and their Chief too. We're starting now.' "
"     After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street,  "
"There they would have all been killed, if it had not been for Bilbo once again. "
     The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. 
     Legolas Greenleaf long under tree 
"Jacquetta Molloy,4017953075857790,04-06-1998
"
####-past.' 
"Ayn MacGuiness,4718152640585463,02-04-1993
"
old 
shining and his face eager. 
"     Then  Gimli bowed low.  'Nay, you are excused  for my  part, lord,'  he "
were.' 
view from his windows.' 
""
"####-darkness  flowed  out  like  a  vapour  from  the  hole  in  the  mountain-side,  and  deep "
"steadily,  until suddenly  they arched  over a nd formed a  tunnel that dived "
turning into  some  creature  of   stone  and steel  that neither despair nor  
knife. A sword you have.' 
lay one long naked sword. 
probably Methedras. and as far  as I can remember the  ring of Isengard lies 
"but I rode on the trail of the Riders. It was  hard to  follow, for  it went "
don't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.' 
"and talk for a  while,  since  I have found  you? It would comfort me. Where "
followed  its own  perilous course at the bottom of a lesser cleft among the 
"fair or foul. Let them take me, if they will!' "
"to an  old sand-pit nearby and there buried:  in the Battle  Pit, as it  was "
work of  the same  craft. So  then  you passed through the Land  of  Lurien?  
     But the  Queen  Arwen  said:  'A  gift I will give  you.  For I  am the 
guidance but the will to climb as high as might be  before his strength gave 
     'Do not let him run away! ' said Boromir. 'It seems that we  shall need 
"imagined in his sleep,  stretch  on through avenues and pillared  courts, on "
"     `Once I do get to sleep,' said Sam, 'i  shall go on sleeping, whether I "
"Alick Croose,4017957116551,19-10-1997
"
     'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the  ground a black cloak 
"in naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.' "
it. 
What are the Black Riders?' 
""
"no evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are "
and the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and made 
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head. 
no!  Very  dreadful things  live  there.  Orcs. yes always  Orcs; but  worse 
"said nothing whatever about  the  ring; and when  they asked him how he did  it, he "
"     Then Frodo  kissed Merry  and Pippin,  and last  of all  Sam,  and went "
somebody  had  counted your  company carefully before you arrived. You three 
 
We  are come  with the  rising  of  the day.  Now the road lies plain to see 
"sword  when it was made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it, "
how  it  is  usually  read.  You  can  say  Expert  Treasure-hunter  instead of Burglar  if 
"Bartholomeus Curme,4017956437966043,10-04-1994
"
"     'But the Sun has not risen, yet,' said Merry. "
"Gabbi Skirven,4041375613812303,13-02-1981
"
warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were 
"Ermentrude Fawcett,4041373418614826,22-11-1985
"
As  soon  as Gandalf  had  heard Bilbo's  yell  he  realized what  had  happened.  In 
"they set a strong guard upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor  "
"turn. Mostly  it  had  been  as  good  as May  can  be,  even  in  merry  tales, but now  it "
"stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent -voices had stopped.  What did "
any moment he might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fields. 'What can 
"dangers  of  this  kind  were  inevitable  in  dealing  with  such  a  guardian,  and  that  it "
"if that does not shatter them, and I  am allowed a little peace from foolish "
"     `Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will speak "
Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a  sea.  Orcs and 
""
"defile.  This was Cirith Gorgor,  the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the land "
"""I  feel magnificent,"" he  thought;  ""but  I expect  I  look  rather absurd. How  they "
     'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf.  
"search  for  man-food that Pippin  discovered the prize of  all the flotsam, "
"wars  of  Minas Tirith. And that we called  the life of Men,  the way of the "
he  were bearing a great  weight. He went  down to meet him and hastily took 
"probably at Great Smials that The Tale of Years1 was put  together, with the "
"cast an end to his master. The darkness seemed to lift from Frodo's eyes, or  "
"Becky Jordine,4017952476273,12-02-1999
"
"stopped,  for,  if  you  remember, Gandalf  had  told  them  to  come  in pairs  every  five "
"in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we "
     All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged. The Captains of the West  
plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.' 
"     ` ""They pay a tribute of horses,"" he answered, ""and send many yearly to "
"They  did  not  sing  or  tell  stories  that  day,  even  though  the weather  improved; "
have not been idle.' 
"between.  The grass was scanty, coarse,  and grey;  and  the leaves  in  the "
"sort. They had not long to wait. Soon they could hear loud  voices, and then  "
"gold, and yet over you gold shall have no dominion. "
"peace. Bard went out to meet them, and with him went Bilbo. "
necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!' 
"a pillow. All the same he did not speak of it, for as the weariness of the days grew "
without a break or turn. As once again the  day wore to its end they came to  
"     `It will not last much longer, I am  afraid,' he said; 'but I  think we "
veins of  precious ore  glint  in the polished  walls; and  the  light glows 
"""You would  have  dropped  him,""  said Dori,  ""if a goblin had suddenly grabbed "
Elvish Lady and her purposes.' 
cool echoing shadows of the house of stone. 
weather we led Gollum through the  woods; and there was a high tree standing 
     'But I should like to know--' Pippin began. 
they  opened  into gaping  horns. their  pinnacles sharp  as the  points  of 
"streaming through  the  bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark "
"returned with the first glimmer of light, and roused his companions.  "
"them. Everywhere men were rising from their despair and dread, seizing their "
"would  not  discuss  his  own  business  and  journeys, and  seemed  chiefly "
amusing. It's  nut sense to try  and get into  Mordor at all. But  if master  
"Arne Adlington,4041591896986750,14-03-1987
"
     After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager  
"     `'Tis not a bird, whatever else it  be,' answered  Anborn. `It has four "
"Cordie Bubbear,4996157584942,20-01-1985
"
"dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to madness and "
two  through the throat.  Gimli hewed the legs from  under another that  had 
"were  nearly  drowned,  and  all  the  baggage  that  he  carried  was  washed  away  off "
"     The Lady bowed her hea d, and she turned then to Boromir, and to him she "
It was not long before they grew to hate the forest as heartily as they had hated 
"Glen Thickens,4299042519844009,13-02-1984
"
""
"Nessie Pengilly,4041590781837,18-07-2000
"
     `Why? ' said Frodo. `Are enemies at hand? ' 
"Eleonora Luddy,4041592298797951,30-07-1983
"
someth ing to stop any dreadful thing happening.' 
"fortress with seven towers. And then again a ship with  black sails, but now "
"####-were leading  him up towards the  slopes of the hill. He came to a path, the "
"Haleigh Cussen,4041376677001,03-08-1981
"
     'Aiya elenion ancalima!' cried Frodo once again behind him. 
""
     And I thought that was best. 
####-bank  all by itself.  With  a shout Sam raced  across  the  grass. The  boat 
     Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and  they  understood.  They 
followers were looking uneasily southwards.  
"pipes  and  blew  smoke  rings,  which  Gandalf  turned  into  different  colours  and  set "
"bit of  a comic rhyme, perhaps. now and again, you know, but not real poetry "
"cousin Bifur, and his brother Bofur; and Bilbo was dancing about and waving his "
"me. We're a bit suspicious round here of anything  out of  the way -uncanny,  "
I've got to go on.' 
""
"     `You  are right, Frodo,'  said Gandalf:  `to go back is to admit defeat "
The nasty creature; the poor wretch! ' 
blow  and  a  cry  sent him darting back into hiding. An  orc-voice rose  in 
you  anything  to follow  but butter and  honey  for  your  bread.  Are  you  
     'Is  there  anyone in this rout  with authority to treat  with me?'  he 
     He called softly  and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped out of the 
"shadow passed  away. A light  fell about her,  and  her  hair  shone  in the "
of white  wool. They had hardly laid  themselves on the deep beds and  drawn 
Justice shall be done upon  him. For wrongfully he  has made war upon Gondor  
"     As furtively as scouts within the campment of their enemies, they crept "
""
"Fran Cases,4017959931585822,20-05-1978
"
     Na-chaered palan -dnriel 
thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.' 
"realm  of  Sauron  and  the  forges  of  his   ancient  might,  greatest  in "
water fell glittering from him to the ground they glinted like red and green 
Minas Tirith. It might be that some  company of  Men  were  hunting here for 
"Jammal Feary,4041373378097012,27-06-1984
"
"Hart McCrostie,4017958297094593,10-01-1990
"
performance would  be very interesting to certain  people.  After that  they 
"     The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's. "
"you've  broken my  thought. Now where was I? Nob,  stables, ah! that was it. "
"of  vigour and hunger, he suddenly understood that he had slept the daylight  "
"But you shall go  now with my blessing upon you,  and upon  all your people. "
"knees at the chasm's edge. But Gollum, dancing  like a mad thing, held aloft  "
     Frodo made no  answer. Almost he  yielded to  the  desire for  help and 
"the keys again, even if I feel inclined to try."" "
Goblins  had  scaled  the Mountain  from  the  other  side  and  already many were 
even as far as  the Misty  Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen. 
"Dex Doumer,4041599740875,16-04-1991
"
'Nor do  any of us see clearly. It is true that  if these hobbits understood 
"     'If those  unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it  might draw them "
"horrible  deeds? Now at any rate he is  as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy. "
"     'A strange name  for a strange folk,' said Gimli. 'But these were  very "
"listening  to the  drums  that  were  beating again,  now  nearer  at  hand. "
"""Get on with the work!"" growled the butler. ""There is nothing in the feeling of "
serve you well! ' 
"thought had wakened.  `Not yet,  eh? Perhaps not. She might help. She might, "
"     'There lies the Gap of Rohan,' said Gandalf. 'It is now almost due west  "
"his knees  quaked, and he did not  dare to  go  near enough to the wizard to "
"with  all his  heart  that he was back  there, and in those days, mowing the  "
"He  seemed  so much  in  earnest  that  the  dwarves  at  last  did  as  he said,  though "
are other ruffians near at hand. They'll be much bolder when there's more of 
and he  fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others 
when the first cold stars came out. 
steep bank and vanish into the  mists; but his fears proved groundless. Only 
####- 
     the countless stars of heaven's field  
""
voice: Mellon! 
     'Well let us go and have lunch then!' said the Dwarf. 
     But  Denethor  did not  permit them to  go  far.  Though the enemy  was 
"'First, be wary! Still many  men in camp beyond Don, an hour's walk yonder,' "
""
"ever -moving  leaves  countless  lights were  gleaming,  green and  gold  and  "
"stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway on their right. It was "
"that  they  could turn to, and they  departed.  And so,  since many men  had "
roving bands of Orcs; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them. 
"     'Sir,' she  said, 'I am in great  unrest,  and  I cannot lie longer  in "
"slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped. "
spears? That I  would call aid; that is our present need. But  who are these 
"Sometimes the ground seems  to  tremble, sometimes it seems to be  the heavy "
"     Wormtongue  halted  and  looked  back at  him, half  prepared  to  stay. "
morning?' 
"     'Which  way  did  it  go?'  asked Strider, suddenly  and sharply. Merry "
"     They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley. "
"been careful  enough in the  last few days, and  this supper is no feast; but "
     Sam said nothing. 
"birds. At  that  they gazed and wondered; but they were no nearer understanding it, "
"Jamey Rapson,4041594928509228,19-12-1975
"
"     And  so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for  "
"on  another,  and some set about  the  bole of the tree,  so that the ladder  "
     'Nay!' said Legolas. 'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.' 
""
here.' 
trying to rescue him. 
challenger to say who he is.' 
green  and  come  back  to  hover  over  the  wizard's  head.  He  had  quite  a  cloud  of 
"a  long smooth  hillside of  turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow "
beyond  these again there  rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen  firs.  
and comers.  
"else fails.  The  cakes  will keep sweet  for  many many  days, if  they are "
"####-Gandalf,  and  Gandalf  means  me!  To  think  that  I  should  have  lived  to  be  good-"
"Sky Lovemore,4017952962744,06-08-1995
"
more. 
"were  crowned  with  stars, but the East was dark  and  blank.  The marching "
"     'Come, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I can't carry it for you, but I can carry "
     A heavy silence fell in the room.  Frodo could hear his  heart beating. 
on  its  sliding  surface  there were  dancing  and  broken  reflections  of  clouds  and  of 
"countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in "
"creature that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe otherwise: one dear to  "
"     Thunder growled  and  rumbled in the distance,  and the rain was  still "
"that lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under his sway; he "
"equipped  save for the hou sehold of Golasgil their lord. From Lamedon, a few "
"of dazzling  foam, but  only a  passing  ghost of her could they  see below, "
their tempers and their hopes. Their bags were filled with food and provisions light 
and the desert that  stretched north and west to  the Emyn Muil. So desolate 
"     'Hm! Not bad, not bad,' said Treebeard.  'That would do. So you live in "
sink  into  the  trees  behind them. They thought of the slanting  light  of 
old and broken.' 
"helm nor mail. His snowy hair  flew free in the wind, his  white robes shone "
left of this high  range rose three peaks; the  tallest and nearest stood up 
hobbits.' 
half-veiled in mist. 
"stepped  up,  and  with  the  spike  of  his  staff  scratched  a  queer  sign  on  the  hobbit's "
"to be  heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the  feet of the Ents,  "
by Tighfield many a year.  And I put as fast a hitch  over the  stump as any 
About  midday  the  banners  of  the  Forest  and  the  Lake  were  seen  to  be  borne 
"funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.' "
And men looked up with faces pale; 
each 
leaves. The  path  itself was  narrow and wound in and out among the trunks. Soon 
""
"     'Yes,' said Faramir, 'of the land of Westernesse that  foundered and of "
(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better  
"     He fell silent and sighed. 'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may "
stairs  going  up  into  the  gloom. And  still  there was  no  sight  nor  sound  of  Smaug. 
"the muster that he commanded at Edoras,  four  nights from now. And there, I "
"     It  was  evening, and the stars were glimmering  in the  eastern sky as "
Faramir was most moved by the story of the fight on the bridge. 
"find me, walking and waiting, and also looking east.  It would ease my care,  "
"came a plunk, very distant, but magnified and repeated in the hollow shaft. "
"moment before he had  felt the opposite,  that  what he had to do, he had to "
Gandalf broke tryst and did not come  when  he  promised. An account to  the 
for  the  affection  of  his  nephews  and  his  nieces.  His  magic  ring  he  kept  a  great 
"Sacha Warwick,4487789268552322,24-08-1983
"
"need it after that horror at  the gate. And unless we have  great  luck,  we "
"them, they sat huddled together upon the faded grass. The time passed slowly "
"     'Whether I came in time or not is yet  to be  seen,' said Gandalf. 'But "
"And  see  that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him "
for 
"wouldn't  like to say. Some beastly  hole of the  Orcs, I'll warrant, with a  "
the dwarves had followed on the advice of Beorn now came to a doubtful and little 
"last, `but I think the  rope came off itself  -- when I called.' He coiled it "
possible the  pretence that Mr. Baggins  was still living at Crickhollow. He 
tidings that I  bring are  evil.  But leave your  trowels  and  sharpen your 
"     The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside "
"under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled stones where  they "
boundary  of Rohan; and  of old all that lay between  Limlight and the White 
"     Out of doubt, out of dark, to the day's rising "
"the  evening  they went on again, always  as nearly  southward as they could "
""
"yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.' "
"of  any  dwelling.  They  were  growing  anxious,  for  they  now  saw  that  the  house "
"of  the bottoms of some of  the bundles, or here and  there  the  tip of a nose, or a bit "
"Victor Gorst,4017958161317,15-12-1982
"
"noon-bells were rung, and there was a  stir in the citadel; for all save the "
"####-rocks  about  the Morannon  were filled with hidden  foes, and  the  shadowy "
"well known  to us all. To  the estimable Mr. Baggins, and perhaps  to one or  two of "
"by Arwen daughter of Elrond; and the crown was bright in the morning, for it "
was useless  to attempt to move further by night.  They made no camp and lit 
your  age!' he  said. 'But there it is: you're three  inches taller than you  
their foul feet in its clean water!-and went on down the old road beside the 
was  surpassed  in all Hobbit records only by two famous characters of  old;  
"of the air,  if it was defended from above. At each turn  of the road  there "
""
"that  it was no good  trying  to do  anything  till  day came with some  little  light, and "
"     'That,'  said Sam, when he  had finished  reciting, `that's a rhyme  we "
doom. 
"again at last. Here is Aragorn son of Arathorn, chieftain of the D®nedain of  "
threw away the wrapping. 
Mountain. He was  determined  to wait  until  the  gold  and  silver  had  been  brought 
"     The next news  was less good. Merry, who had been out  all  night, came "
heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.' 
all the same. Don't  make yourselves  too much at home! Please remember -all 
"ride with me  to find Treebeard?  We must go round about, but it is not far. "
     At  last  as the  afternoon was  waning they came  to  the eaves of the 
collars and their belts; and their faces and their songs were filled with mirth. Loud 
"from  the far land where I dwelt. But why they come, and how many  they  be, "
"""Come on! Come on!"" cried the others. ""Let us follow Balm's path!"" "
"news of  the  Shire far  away, nor  of  the dark  shadows  and  perils  that "
"     'Yes,  I will go,' he answered  slowly. 'But what names shall I report?  "
on  the  point  of  breaking  out again  between  the  Northerners  and  the 
"heard you  muttering:  ""Shall  I  ever   look  down into that valley again, I "
our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself. So have a care!  
""
"     'But,' said Pippin. "
behind. Beyond  the fire  he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to  be 
"hurried  down  to the Road. 'This is  Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of "
passing tale;  all the years from Eorl the Young to Thjoden  the  Old are of 
"Thror  on  my  back?  If  there  is  any  grumbling  to  be  done,  I  think  I  might  have  a "
"made  him  drowsy,  so  that  every  now  and  again  he  nodded  and  nearly  fell off, or "
"Dian Burlingame,4041379666787,06-10-1977
"
"passing. The Younger Days are  beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but "
"Gennifer MacRedmond,4041593574395,06-07-1980
"
himself  from  being  hustled  and  battered  to  bits;  but  at  last  the  jostling  crowd 
"herald,  and  Aragorn  with  the sons of Elrond,  and  Jomer  of Rohan,  and "
     'Bill  Ferny?'  said Frodo. 'Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beast  
all the absurd  things you  have done since  you left home.' Frodo lay  down 
""
"     `Behold the Argonath, the Pillars  of  the Kings! ' cried  Aragorn. `We "
"think, not  to  find Faramir here. And where has he  got to himself? He left "
"""Be  off!""  called  Thorin.  ""You  have  mail  upon  you,  which  was  made  by  my "
and 
"     'And I'm a Took, Peregrin Took,  but  I'm generally called  Pippin,  or  "
"one place. The great bow  twanged. The black arrow sped straight from  the string, "
""
Concerning Hobbits  
"treasury  of  Elendil, set here by  the Kings  of Gondor. Now my hour  draws "
"####-     `A plain road, though it  led through a hedge of swords,' said Boromir. "
seldom seen.  Once  or  twice the  travellers  heard  the rush  and whine of 
     The smoky  blur of the mountains  in the  East  was  lost  in a  deeper  
of 
could get the most help he could offer.  
"Jake Siaskowski,4145334107330,20-03-1975
"
gates. There they  saw close  beside  them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly 
not  have squandered what  fortune gave.  He would have brought me  a  mighty 
greensward. 
"     In that riding went  also Queen  Arwen, and Celeborn and Galadriel with "
issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land. another fifteen leagues 
dazzling in  the sun. 
     'Be kind to a poor old hobbit!' laughed Frodo. 'I shall be as thin as a  
hasn't  told  us everything. Something scared Mr.  Frodo  badly.  He screwed 
"     Sam had lain  still, fascinated by this debate, but watching every move "
"and beyond the feet  of  the hills  turned across their path in a wide bend, "
"old Mr Bilbo.  But those aren't always  the best tales to  hear, though they "
"Janessa MacGillespie,4041590765306777,06-12-1990
"
"     Gandalf's eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon,' he said. "
"about  you, Frodo? There was not time to say  so, but I have never been more "
 
"In  this  way  they  rescued  Kili,  Bifur,  Bofur,  Don  and  Nori.  Poor  old  Bombur "
"handwriting, though when he wrote himself it was a bit thin and spidery.  "
what Sharkey says.' 
your friend is let  in when  he comes.  I'd better send Nob to look for him. 
"Mountains had eyes  that could  look at  the  sun unblinking, and could  see a  rabbit "
"question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.' "
"cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even  sent me a message, I would "
"Tower.  At  swiftest they could not come  there before today, and maybe they "
"long  grasses,  between  the  boulders,  the  patches  of  rabbit-cropped  turf,  the  thyme "
"army could not assault with hope, not even if it had brought thither engines "
"cries. Down in the dark trough,  cut off from the dying  glare of  Orodruin, "
"Taite Sills,4151081532860,11-03-1979
"
"fighting!'  said  old Hob. 'Why,  they  said you was  dead! Lost in  the Old "
there  lived  at  this  time  their  greatest  king. Before  his  huge  doors  of  stone  a  river 
"long, and  hobbits have  an  amazing power of  recovery. The memory, or  the "
"Ettore Gawthorp,4041371917308080,07-04-1982
"
"Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the "
"behind  them,  and what  is more, with  the more  cunning  sort  it must  be  a moon  of "
none have escaped unscathed.' 
Company. 
translated it. I never knew that.' 
be 
yet.' 
"being all alone."" "
"     `Trapped in the end!  ' said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above "
"Elves are, and  quicker at taking the colour of the outside,  you might say.  "
"sailing  to other  shores! Bless me,  life used  to be quite  inter  - I mean, you used  to "
"Sigrid Bezant,4041379511637,06-09-1999
"
"day, while still I was a boy.' "
follow till I come back or call!' 
"Maddie Porson,4017953322716,23-05-1984
"
lest it destroy  us. Without it we  cannot by force defeat his force. But we 
"     But Aragorn smiled. 'It  will serve,' he said. 'The worst is  now over. "
in  the mountains  of  the North.  I  have heard  that  there are  still  forgotten  treasures 
     The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He 
     'Find  it? ' said Grishnbkh:  his  fingers  stopped crawling and gripped 
"     For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp  of fear it "
now  they  must  have  had  a  private  Side-door  which  only  they  knew  about.  But 
"     The wind is blowing, and the white foam is flying. "
"to take  Faramir into the Houses  of Healing, he  went  up on  to  the walls "
"     'I have  never called  you  one,' Gandalf answered. 'And  I  am not one "
"hours with Gollum, and a very  hungry Gollum too, loose beside  them. `Don't  "
"powers have our enemies, and strange  weaknesses!' said Thjoden. 'But it has "
clattered on the ground. 
"accounted a marvel among the Three Kindreds µ Elves. Dwarves, and Men. "
far away  the voices of  the Entmoot  could be heard still going on; but now 
"Berta Thursfield,4017957126522725,22-02-1998
"
     Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar'ni Pheriannath! 
where each dwarf was kept. He found all their twelve cells in different parts of the 
"last of the Company, but not the last of those that took the downward road. "
"been twilight in some later year, or in some other world. "
that the Lady Jowyn will lead them!' 
"     'We have  come at last  to  a hard choice,' he said.  'Shall we  rest by "
the hobbit crept through the enchanted door and stole into the Mountain. It was far 
speed. 
     'Then you must go down to the battle.' 
"herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We "
gone  now.  It  has  been  melted.  And  it  seems  that  Hobbits fade  very 
"Farrel Quinevan,4041375262698,04-10-1984
"
"""gatherers"" and ""sharers"", I reckon, going round counting and measuring  and "
dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why went you  ever 
"     Even as they gazed,  the Silverlode passed out into the currents of the "
prove or disprove the legends that have come down from distant years. 
####-inside the hood came  a  noise as of  someone sniffing to  catch an  elusive 
the  trees do not like strangers. They watch  you. They  are usually content 
"thoughts, and all we do is ruinous. "
"bare and dry, and did not reveal much. "
"Bombur, and Bilbo heartily agreed with him. They argued about it backwards and "
"Silas Ziem,4017957358374035,24-09-1991
"
"Deeping-stream passed out.  About the  feet  of  the Hornrock it wound,  and  "
""
"Ailsun Stirgess,4324852027369508,12-07-1998
"
"Mirkwood,  and  from  Dunland  in  the  west.  And  the  King  pardoned  the "
"a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But "
"     'If you pick up with  a  horse-thief, and  bring him to my house,' said "
"for them  to see,  a large  pale leaf of golden  hue, now fading and turning "
"     `Fissh, nice fissh,' said the voice. "
"they watched the dawn grow slowly in the  sky, now bare and cloudless, until "
regarded as  a pleasant event and  a chance for fun. No  living hobbit (save 
"Tamma Guys,4135725695688,04-09-1994
"
"the  out-stretched  lands.  There  behind  lay  Mirkwood,  blue  in  the  distance,  and "
"how the wine and other goods came up the rivers, or over land, to the Long Lake. "
the tunnels and guide them in the right direction. 
"     Beaver the builder, buck the leaper, "
"they  were  quite  recovered,  fitted  out  in  fine  cloth  of  their  proper  colours,  with "
     Sam  and Merry  got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo  and Pippin 
"clear:  fowls chattering  in a yard,  someone closing a  door of  a  distant "
"there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed "
"Minas Tirith. First rode Elrohir  and  Elladan with a  banner of silver, and "
"     'Back to the hall,' answered  Gandalf. 'But  our visit to this room has "
flicker of  a piercing Eye;  and then the shadows were furled  again and the 
"     'That is best known  to yourself,  lord,' said Hirgon. 'But ere long it "
wide 
"     'There is quite a lot going on,' said Merry:  'and even if we tried  to "
"the uncouth name of Shire."" "
"     `You  lie quiet, or  you'll pay for it! You've not got long to live  in "
"They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of  a spreading  hawthorn,  "
feel  it as an actual  weight  dragging him earthwards.  But far more he was 
"""Only  a  bat  and  a  dropped  torch,  nothing  worse!""  he  said  in  answer  to  their "
"'Little service, no  doubt, will so great a lord of Men  think to  find in a  "
"Danell Hart,4017955240635,08-06-1994
"
"looked  at  the baggage. 'Two  packs  are  missing.' he  said, 'and  one  is "
the 
"Garv Zimmermanns,4017956066625,22-07-1997
"
"     `Take  care,  Sam!'  said Frodo. `And be quick! There may be orcs still "
"""Knife!"" he said at last. "
     In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down:  Frodo 
"sun  rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or whatever it was, that "
length to an open glade not far above the banks of the stream. 
"dead. He had found Gandalf; but he shrank back, cowering into a shadow.  "
"she said; 'and thus  do  men  win renown.' She paused. 'Lord.' she said, 'if "
     Bill  Ferny flinched and shuffled to the gate and unlocked it. 'Give me 
"waited, brooding in  deep thought and sleepless malice behind  the dark veil  "
"sitting there, under  the weight of doom, silent, µ not moving, shrouded  in "
you heed them! Don't look! Don't follow them! Where's the master? ' 
"about  Edrendil in the house  of  Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was "
"into  a dark place, and he came with great anger. He lifted up his hand, and "
"Jan Ramel,4041590470845,05-11-1984
"
the trees they just cut down and leave to rot -- orc-mischief that; but most  
"     'Do as  you  will,  Master  Halfling,' said Denethor.  'But  my life is "
"of the Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward  from "
Tell  us where you have  hidden  our friends! What  have you done with them?  
needn't have seen it; but it's a good riddance.' 
"####-Mirkwood,  and that if you  let it, it  might take you to the Lonely Mountain "
If we  keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north 
""
"are desperate, not while all the  long  leagues of Eriador still  lie before "
####-There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his 
"twitching. His  eyes,  filled with anger  and  disgust,  were  fixed  on the "
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it. 
"dressed in bright colours, being notably fond of yellow and green;  but they "
     Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed him again for a while. 
"Krista Guirard,4176576326658258,07-09-1996
"
"     'Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never,' said Jomer. 'And "
Peregrin. 
made homeless by the troubles. So that feud was ended. 
""
"they heard a  distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was  falling "
"these messengers had found a host already on the move, although it was then only "
"they  gazed,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  another,  they  forgot  fear  and  even "
domination of the author. 
"####-""Come  on!""  said  Bilbo.  ""I  am waiting!"" He  tried  to  sound  bold  and  cheerful, "
 
Muil  and borne away  towards Isengard against the will of his own servants. 
     When golden were the boughs in spring 
"Rosabelle Myrie,4017959842139,26-02-2001
"
that is the very last I should  have thought  of: to have to fight half-orcs 
"Freddi Crankhorn,4587524928634684,24-12-1985
"
####-was a shelf under a cliff. Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at 
"under a green  tree  together , now in  silence, now in speech. And  each day "
"was  given  to them. Then  Gandalf came and in his  arms,  to the  wonder of  "
adventure  in  the  forest he was  always  trying  to  recapture  the beautiful dreams he 
"     'In one thing you  have not changed, dear friend,' said  Aragorn:  'you  "
"from this where you lost  count.  We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has "
     `So said Denethor.  And yet  there lie in his  hoards many records that 
no man enter it without their leave!' 
"Mathian Vinden,4041595063447777,06-04-2001
"
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass  silently to the 
the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now  vanishing  quickly into 
"Coleman Titheridge,4041373720945,02-03-1988
"
####-* BOOK I *  
""
"river, for the narrow land there did not seem to be strongly guarded. "
"Chaddy Assandri,4688113887530675,29-09-1994
"
"Mordor;  a vast shape winged and ominous. It  scudded  across the  moon, and "
"lost on-poor Bilbo Baggins, who was wagging his mouth in protest at being called "
"And I'm not  used,  Master Beregond, to waiting hungry on others while  they "
silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil. 
####-they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a  table with a lot  of 
"     `Oh you're hopeless,' said Sam. 'Go to sleep!' "
"safer than sitting on the  ground,' said  Gimli. He looked across the stream "
or  decision. He simply found himself drawing  out the  chain and taking the 
"Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being  but a  child had remained  here in "
     Gripping  the stony lip of  the  fall with  his fingers he  let himself 
"Gilberta Cornu,4017953438017,06-01-1980
"
""
"silence  they  feared  some  cunning  devilry  of  his,  but  they  could  not  sit  there  for "
     Sam climbed up  on  the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin. 
     When day came at last the hobbits were surprised to see how much closer 
"Nameless Land. he turned. For a moment, motionless  in intolerable doubt, he "
"####-upon his  steed, and with his company galloped madly back to  Cirith Gorgor. "
"lived, keeping  our  own, and  serving  no  foreign  lord,  good or evil. We "
"Elendil, lest a time come when the memory of these great  matters shall grow "
"     `Beyond  all towers strong  and high,'  he began  again,  and  then  he "
"Joann Drewery,4017952795128,01-03-1976
"
and in the midst of that valley is a tower of  stone called Orthanc.  It was 
of  the Mountain  in  the  centre;  and  the  defenders  had  too  few  to  bar  the  way  for 
said;  'but you are wise and swift and  come at need.  Far let us  ride  now 
wisest person in the world (with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and 
command. 
"Beregond.  'Greetings,  Targon!' he called through the hatch.  'It  is early "
"ago, "
"and  the  dwarves  were  starting  on  a  round  of  buttered  scones,  when  there  came-a "
"yelp  inside,  and  a  toe  shot  up  and  kicked  the  spider  straight  and  hard. There was "
"and  they  did  not  particularly  please  the  dwarves,  but  in  the  meantime  they  were "
"     One of the  Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn, and  it "
"     'I have  not,' answered Merry; 'but the forest seems better to  me, all "
     'Gandalf!' said Frodo. 'I thought it was he.  Gandalf  the Grey dearest 
"broken,  fading to a winding track between heather and whin  that thrust amid "
"the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to the valley, and  "
it. There's no way down that I can see. And we couldn't cross  all that open 
""
     They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The wind 
"the boiling pools, though laden with water? ' "
     Before  long  he was  walking  with  Gandalf  once  more down  the cold  
     `Have  you got it here?' he asked  in a whisper. `I  ca n't help feeling 
smooth 
"do not know. The  Shadow has  crept now  to the  feet  of the Mountains, and "
"Zelig Rimell,4041598412641,13-05-1996
"
"""Up you two get, and off we go!"" said Thorin. "
"Deonne Tudgay,4041596733568,19-03-1999
"
"     `Patience!' said Faramir, but without anger.  `Do not speak before your "
"and grim  at times. In fact, he reminds  me often of you. I didn't know that "
road Bilbo  recalled  the  happenings  and  the words  of  a  year  ago-it seemed  to him 
"make even a blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-men."" "
"Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his girth promised. Tom  "
"Jareb Stepney,4041597307719,29-07-1978
"
Middle-earth when the world was young; and  she was the fairest  maiden that 
"Sigismond Eggerton,4017958179863,17-05-2001
"
"Pennie Cescon,4913787464833,10-12-1993
"
"topmost walls' shone  out against the  sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl "
numbers. Already many of  the goblins were  flying back down  the  river  to  escape 
""
gloom.  'We're trapped at last!' he said He sank to the  ground beneath  the 
"last.  'That Gandalf should be late, does not  bode well. But it is said: Do "
     At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the 
"long sword, and in the other a knife;  both the knife and the hand that held "
There was nothing else  to be done; and  the goblins did not  like  it. They came 
"stole  from  the  shadow  of  the  doorway,  across  the  floor  to  the  nearest  edge  of  the "
"justified, for they did not like it a bit, and started grumbling loudly in spite of their "
even  a  Hero.  I  tried  to  find  one;  but  warriors  are  busy  fighting  one  another  in 
"in enchanted shape, and if he would come in as a bear and kill them. "
"can! Come down little birds, or you will get roasted in your nests! Sing, sing little "
"Mirabella Pratt,4017957958192,18-01-1990
"
"dwarves had taken, quite recently, because it had been found quite safe up to now.  "
warning.' 
Smjagol in a last effort. `Not now. Not yet.' 
did  not  feel  at  all  sure  bow  the  dwarves  would  take  it.  His  fears  were  quite 
"Rapids hidden in the mist; they wer e tired and sleepy, and their hearts were "
""
"Essa Eisenberg,4041593940018,12-01-1984
"
"mouth,  but  still  he  held  on. Now  faint  as  an  echo,  but menacing,  the  voice  came "
the  plain began to spout  and belch. Several of the Ents  got scorched  and 
"####-     'That word comes too oft and easy from  your lips,' said Gandalf. 'I do "
"####-and as they climbed up and  up, they became more  and more aware of the long "
"listening. The darkness had been dispelled, and far away westward sunset was "
he sniffed and muttered all the time to himself. Sometimes he would  hold up 
and a thousand horse. But the main strength  of the  Rohirrim  that remained 
"Isengard  as the Men of Rohan call  it. He was very quiet to begin with, but "
Suddenly he was aware of a man climbing up and coming towards him. 
spoil the joke.' 
"     `It's going well, they say.' "
"outwards  to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they "
"""If one was to sting me,"" he thought, ""I should swell up as big again as I am!"" "
"Christyna Delahunty,4041590463618,12-09-1997
"
"rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes buried in deep brakes "
seized him and he sat up and shrank away. 
With  that  he  turned  and  found  that  the  last  space  between  two  tall  trees  had 
"wait a bit and be patient! ' he said. Then he lay on the ground, leaning out "
"Nazgyl came, shooting  like  flaming bolts, as  caught in the  fiery ruin of "
     They returned now to the ruins of the  gate. Hardly had they passed out 
"or read out of a great big book with red  and black letters, years and years "
"unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must find the path, if we are "
a great  weariness came  down on him like  a  cloud. He could dissemble  and 
     There was still an  echo as  of following feet  in  the cutting   behind 
####-     Soon afterwards they came  upon another stream that ran down  from  the 
them all too. They will think we had a very strong magic to pass through all those 
     'Here is a pretty toy for  Tom and for his  lady! Fair was she who long 
"     'Master, dear master,' he said, but Frodo did not  speak. As he had run "
"all the ways, and discovering  my secrets. He and his  foul folk are  making "
"Mines,  and considering  anxiously  the next  course  that he should take; a  "
their own tales  they were the original inhabitants and wer e the descendants 
Gate. 
"knights in bright mail and tall  guards in silver and black  standing there, "
and crawling in and out filled all the air.  
arms were trembling. 'What would I give for it? What do you mean?' 
"into  it, a vapour and a steam would arise enough  to cover all  the  land with a mist "
can read somewhat of the future; and that he  will  at times search even the 
"Blanca Venable,4041593886716,23-04-1982
"
clear and commanding voice: 
"happened  to  be  outside  (I  was  one  luckily  -a  fine  adventurous  lad  in  those  days, "
bade you  Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and  to the wonder of 
"huge sitting  figure, still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath. "
"     'I've an idea,' said  Sam.  'Let's go  to old  Tom Cotton's down  South "
"     So Thjoden and Jowyn came  to  the City of Gondor, and all who saw them "
green arrow-feathers  sticking from  his neck  below  a  golden collar.  His 
"""Now  I  am  a  burglar  indeed!""  thought  he.  ""But  I  suppose  I  must  tell  the "
"     'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,' said Pippin. "
"with the Rangers, and maybe  with  Thranduil's folk in Mirkwood. And "
"sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn "
I saw  a strange creature with eyes climbing to the  flet that night. Haldir 
surprised at all.  Gandalf obviously  expected to find  Treebeard  here; and 
"sliding  away,  huddled  all  together,  in  a  fearful  confusion  of  slipping,  rattling, "
soon wore off. 
ashes.' And they were filled with grief and wonder at the tale that he told. 
"     'Last  night  you  began to  tell  me  strange  things  about  my ring, "
"Merry.  Well, I'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I "
say. 
"     `If my advice  is heeded, it will be the western shore,  and the way to "
scion  of the Eldest of Trees!  But how comes it here? For it  is not itself 
"busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and "
"the spiders did not like. At any rate here the light was greener, and the boughs less "
"believe.  Buried him, I hope;  though Worm has been very hungry lately.  No, "
fine fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift again. Come along!' 
"     `Smjagol is hungry,' said Gollum. `Be back soon.' "
"Kiele Malshinger,4017954467296,01-09-1994
"
####-overtake them.' 
angry  all  at  once. When  about  fifty  had  gone  off  to  the  place where  he  had  stood 
"could bend and  sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last  he spoke, and "
"""Farewell!  O  Gandalf!""  said  the  king.  ""May  you  ever  appear  where  you  are "
"you  will  come  there before me, if you wish.' He rose and  looked  long at "
The weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had laboured and  fought 
struggle  in  a  difficult  place  where  there  seemed  to  be  no  convenient  branches  at 
 
####-over which  it had run straight for  some miles.  At that point it bent left 
"####-to  a green hillock and  there  set  his banner,  and  the  White Horse  ran "
filled now with  the early  sunlight. Frodo halted  and looked  out over the 
"stones; through the hamlets of Underharrow and Upbourn, where many sad "
"Jannel Gauch,4220219613767,20-06-1990
"
"farewell, and may she suffer never hurt nor sickness again. I commend her to "
nothing 
"and  see  the  tiny  flashes  of  fire,  and  hear  the  howling  and  yelping  come  up  faint "
himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed. 
"the  Shire  without  its  being generally known, it will  be  worth a little "
"think he'd try to throttle  me first  now. We don't see eye to eye, and he's "
"servant."" "
Treebeard  did   not  talk  to  them.  He   hummed  to  himself  deeply  and 
am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.' 
the others to search the sheds?' 
"course,  expect  that  any one would remember that it was he who discovered all by "
"shadow  of  death.  The horses were uneasy. But the king sat upon  Snowmane, "
"you're dead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be "
"clad with trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of "
"Domeniga Boyer,4041595897136299,03-06-1997
"
"don't care what a beggar lacks, do you? For  you have all you want, food and "
notice  of  old  Strider? They  had  run a  long  way shouting--he could not 
"     'You can have my cloak,  Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. He unslung his  pack and  "
"Laetitia Desseine,4041373376441,06-07-1977
"
""
"-Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad "
"hundred  miles by that  way  from the  Cross-roads to the Morannon, and what "
"     'Yes, of course! Who  did you think it was?' said Merry coming forward.  "
"     `Treasure it, Lady,' he answered, `in memory of your words to me at our "
"     Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea, "
"you,  Samwise,  you  were not  brought, and  do but pay  the penalty of your  "
"Gorgoroth. Taller and broader than Men they were, and they were clad only in "
listen to the vile orc-voices. 
 
     So the  King  of  the Mark came back  victorious  out  of the  West  to 
Bilbo  crept  away  from  the  wall  more  quietly  than  a  mouse;  but  Gollum 
"atone for his evils, and depart then for ever. Come forth!' "
shall choose.' 
"quite what I'd call right: no stock, no onions, no taters. I've got a bit of "
thinks is quite secret.' 
""
We've only got a very short time. 
stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many a long 
"     As  Frodo  did  so,  he  now  saw  fine  lines, finer than  the  finest  "
"darkness,  where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with flickers of dull  "
he felt the  burden light. He had feared that he would  have barely strength 
     'Nothing.' 
and hissed. 
     'Comfort yourself!'  said Gandalf.  'In  no  case  would  Boromir  have 
"thought, chilling your heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and "
"""A sword, a blade which came out of Gondolin!"" "
of  the  Wargs  fire  was  leaping.  But  the  wolf-guards  did  not  leave  the  trees. 
"heard,'  said  Jomer,  'none now  in  the land of the  living  can tell  his "
Look at last on meadows green 
"     Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness, "
"among the greater casts  there  fell  another hail, less  ruinous  but  more "
"hill and sky they crackled, withered, and went out. "
said Pippin. 
"read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more  than a page or two.  "
"one  another,  every  one  of  them  got  up  and  scrambled  forwards  into  the  ring with "
as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.' 
"     'They're all closed,' said Robin.  'The  Chief  doesn't hold with beer. "
crying: 
back up the green-sward to the road again. 
mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let  
"Cissy Phillip,4017958359929,06-06-1994
"
""
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on  the 
"     'Come back,  Saruman!' said  Gandalf  in  a  commanding  voice. To  the  "
"that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure "
"on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo! ' "
"     'I shan't call it  the end, till we've cleared  up  the mess,' said Sam "
     All  the  one hundred  and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast; 
"     'I think,  Frodo, that maybe you will not need to come back, unless you  "
"Johna Antcliffe,4017955246949299,09-03-1984
"
stood 
"to say, though I am sure it was not from personal experience."" "
"nothing. Only empty. Only hungry; yes, we  are hungry. A  few little fishes,  "
"     The passage seemed to go on  for miles, and always the chill air flowed "
with weakness he wept. And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge. 
our knees.' 
"Alta O'Day,4041598249753,06-08-1983
"
"Arathorn, "
but they bore round  bucklers  huge and black and wielded heavy  hammers  in 
"     They leapt up  refreshed. Frodo  ran  to the eastern window, and  found "
"     Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the  camping-place and "
forget. Nor shall I forget  finding you on the hill of  the last battle. But 
"He woke to find himself in a white bed, and the moon shining through an open "
do.' 
behind them. 
     At  length  they  came to land  again  upon the southern slopes of Amon 
Good! Very good! You lighten  my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by 
"Vanni Wandtke,4041373126820,18-09-1976
"
     Outside the door they all  halted. There was  a  cave  or  rock -chamber  
"Devin Stuttman,4017951255959,24-02-1986
"
come at the waning of the year.  
"Before  they  could  shout  in  praise  of  the  shot,  however,  a  dreadful  wail  from "
"maybe  evils done by the way,  but  approving the high and ultimate purpose: "
house. 
"craft and power  of  old had  wrought  upon them,  and  still they preserved "
had not been idle. 
"rough bier they carried the  body of  their companion to the shore, together  "
""
"hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed down under the rim "
in fair Lothlurien. 
"struggling  and  jostling. Sam came on. He drew the sword, a flicker of blue "
a deep cutting through an out-thrust of the eastward hills. But the Captains 
"tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his  head;  `and like Beorn of old "
     'Yes. if she had nought else to say.' 
begun to think Gandalf was going in come all the way and would always be there 
"were  with  him,  and  down  they  came  like  huge  black  shadows.  The  wolves "
"Snowmane  snorted and reared,  eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the "
"the other, one shoulder-high,  and another half-high, and holding these  the "
"     'Yes, I  don't suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of  kindness,' "
"nearly  spent. Sam saw that he could not  go much further in  this  fashion, "
not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the 
"     When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold  "
"They ran  swifter. They passed into  a  hall, bright with daylight from  its "
"anguish in  his  face,  and now he  seemed an  old and wizened man, crushed, "
"Franny Pepperd,4056748795117,09-04-1993
"
"But  the  wizard  called  them  to  their  senses.  ""We  must  be  getting  on  at  once, "
"were filled with  evil and  horror. Ever they circled  above the  City, like "
 
"injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to "
white. It was stained as with dried blood; and looking closer they perceived 
creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their  own that 
your death?' 
Frodo commanded him angrily and  laid a hand on  his sword-hilt  that Gollum 
"rending cry, in a last desperate race there flew, faster than the winds, the "
"Dulcie Grieveson,4041593930944,16-08-2001
"
commotion as soon as  the remaining  guests were astir and heard news of the 
"with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case  of the Tooks of Great Smials, or  "
"     'Neither do I,'  answered  the wizard. 'I have  merely begun  to wonder  "
"Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a word of his. Rope!' "
of the Entwash;  the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an 
"rumour came of war in the North. Lone men, riding wild, brought word of foes "
"him.  He  wondered  whether  he  ought  not,  now  he  had  the magic  ring,  to  go  back "
"right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum "
"camps  and  the  ponies.  ""I  am  sure  he  knows  we  came  from  Lake-town  and  had "
with us. Where is Gimli?' 
"They asked him where he was making for, and he answered: ""You are come to "
think  we  were  after  their  sheep.  And  at  other  times  they  would  be  right.  No!  we 
"     'No!'  said Merry.  'It's  no good ""getting under cover"".  That is just  "
"     'I wish we could  feel  sure that he made  the marks, whatever they may "
"     'No, not because I choose,' answered Frodo. `It  does not belong to me. "
"Kipper Luton,4284900793551,30-06-1984
"
"longer holding the Ring, but it was there, a hidden power, a  cowing  menace "
"     'It shall be so,' said Thjoden. 'Let the heralds  announce to  the folk  "
"Aragorn. Because he was high and puissant, and you wished to have renown "
"Fredek Billings,4017952535892124,15-09-2001
"
"Crissy Larkings,4897982193117,22-03-1993
"
"he felt a new strength of heart, and the  heavy drowsiness  left  his limbs.  "
"Doretta Hunte,4041594336379438,17-02-1985
"
stream  running  down from  the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with  steep 
"under, and the River closed over his curly head. "
"that  I could find it, for it is  a healing plant that the  Men of  the West "
"     `I thought  it was  only a kind of cram, such as  the Dale-men make for "
as 
"     In the green fields of Lebennin, "
"affray than it has been yet. And  you cannot,  I  think, go far today in any "
thought  their  opinion  of  his  adventure might  be  interesting. Elves  know  a  lot  and 
""
he's got just  one plain scheme in his muddled head. I think he really is in 
     Out from the door where it began. 
"Sonja Hamill,4041372453760841,29-02-1988
"
it ends.' 
"more friendly with Elves  than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill in "
"near he rose. And then they knew him, changed as he was, so high and glad of "
stronger. 
"it anyway.'  'So do I,' said Merry.  'Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or  "
####-is  not  true  to  say  that  they  could  see  nothing:  they  could  see  eyes. They  slept  all 
poetry. He wrote what I have just said.' 
"mountain-path like a  sheer  and sudden  wall, and  its  crest, sharp as  if "
"a sword-hilt,' said Gandalf. "
"underground,  but now a star  had descended  into  the  very earth. Still it "
"Bartholemy Wellman,4041372659501783,16-07-1981
"
"     Like rising lark, and falling rain, "
"     'The Prince  of Dol Amroth is in  command in the absence of  the Lord,' "
""
staying for long.' 
     The Shire at  this time had hardly any 'government'. Families  for  the 
"interested  in  this work, especially  since it was primarily  linguistic in "
"Cecil Treacy,4041375604629658,29-10-1981
"
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers  that are called in  our own 
can't let two tired travellers rest.' 
"alive, lurking in wait.' "
"precious asks, and it doesn't answer, we eats it, my preciousss. If it asks us, and we "
to Frodo. 'They're as near as I want them now.' 
"since the day before. He beckoned Gandalf to a seat, but Pippin was left for  "
"     'Then she must be lovely indeed,' said Faramir. `Perilously fair.' "
"precious? No. It won't see us, and its nassty little sword will be useless, yes quite."" "
"eyes,  and he wept; and he said: 'Do not take my son from me!  He calls  for  "
"noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.' "
"cried. 'Are there no leeches among you? She is hurt to the death  maybe, but "
light and as swift as you may!' 
be  going in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended  
"joined into  an  unbroken roof,  and  a  straight grey rain came softly  and "
are  too  near  the mountains. Travellers  seldom  come  this way  now. The  old maps 
"Shayna Kigelman,4041377192002306,28-08-1999
"
"couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in  the dusk` a  "
"coming, the Warden  spoke his name, and he turned and saw the Lady  Jowyn "
I think he will  resist the evil power of the wound longer  than his enemies 
raised  platform  between  the  pillars  and  the  outer  wall.  For  him  there was  a  little 
"""You had better wait here,"" said the wizard to the dwarves; ""and when I call or "
"     `On,  on,  on,'  said Gollum. `We  never went that way, but they say it "
-- until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.' 
by  his  heirs when all other heirlooms  were lost; for it was spoken of old 
"take back my words and deeds at the Gate."" "
     Only a few steps; and now only a  few more and  he would be going  down 
"Pedro Camilio,4041378945274705,08-05-1997
"
"singing songs of far away; and if they were now large and magnificent,  they  "
"cocked  for  any  beginnings  of  a  sound  without,  his  other  was  alert  or  echoes "
"Bonny Fernely,4041375124245639,29-12-1999
"
"far away. The Ents stopped the  inflow in the  night, and sent the Isen back  "
"stomachs,  and  hoist  their  empty  sacks  and  packs,  and  trudge  along  the  track "
It  seemed  that  the  ring  he  had  was  a  magic  ring:  it  made  you  invisible!  He  had 
"thought  of  the  catch?  A  fourteenth  share,  I  suppose,  Or  something  like  it,  those "
     These  words only made  more pressing to Sam's mind a problem that  had 
high  above  the  main pass. It was that way  that  Smjagol got  out  of the 
not.' 
"hidden, hidden  dark and deep. Not used, I say, unless  at the uttermost end "
"Claudetta Stewart,4017951161204687,23-08-1986
"
"foot high,  very sturdy, with a tall  head,  and hardly any neck. Whether it "
"####-better  keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it  seems that I  am  a  danger, a  "
hear  or  feel  him  trotting  along  well  behind  their  torch-light  as  they  led  off  their 
"were  too busy  to ask how he got  there. He  took out his  sword again, and again  it "
"     Flinging on some clothes, Merry looked outside. The world was darkling. "
"creatures   beyond  count,  these  little  people   seemed  of  very  little "
"small  chip of rock and no  more, perhaps, in a whole  anxious  day  -- so we "
"     At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, and "
"movement of his forces, and even in the  fastness of his own realm he sought "
indeed 
""
"is empty.  Nothing  is  on the  road,  and  no sound  of foot, or  horn,  or  "
"tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside  the road  already longer than "
"Moria, and in Lothlurien  and Galadriel. He made them describe the Shire and "
"     'And  so is  this. Folk have  come  to grief here. Aye, they  have ,  to "
"-- no!' he cried. `No! Silly  hobbits, foolish, yes foolish! They mustn't do "
     Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a  
"and all could get inside."" "
"if by life or death I can save you, I will.' "
which can wait until after lunch.' 
have made a Great  Ring  of his  own with which to challenge the self-styled 
"packets  of  lembas, and  left everything else behind.' They  looked at what "
####-longer  ones. At all costs we must  keep  you away from the Golden Perch. We 
we had agreed that this should  be  done; and I was  glad to  be  rid of his 
     'Days?' said Frodo. 
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in  front with Frodo; 
"meant: ""What am I going to get out of it? and am I going to come back alive?"" "
long  ago. He had not had  a pocket-handkerchief for ages. He loosened his dagger 
"belonged to the early days of the Shire, and hobbit-building had long  since "
Isengard was seen: They reached the summit of the  rock;  they drove towards 
 
promise.' 
"Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew some good old "
"now!  I think we had better not move out from here again,  until it has gone "
"####-""Ha! Ha! You  admit  the  'us',""  laughed Smaug. ""Why not say  'us fourteen' and "
     Frodo had a  very  trying time that afternoon. A fa lse rumour  that the 
smoke rising from Isengard these days.  
"Annamarie Lankham,4017952692127,22-06-1978
"
"seemed  to  stick  in  his mouth; he wanted  to  shout out:  ""Give me more  time! Give "
####- 
"fro, singing softly to  himself in his own tongue, and as  he sang the white "
"into  the  food-bags,"" thought Bilbo. ""Bother burgling and everything to do with it! "
"O! What are you doing, "
"cool green  shadow, and all about  them was silence. The birds seemed all to "
"Helge McGinty,4041373244136,25-02-1979
"
"     `I like  that! ' said Sam. `I  should  like  to learn it. In Moria,  in  "
"needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, over which flowed a chill air "
"courage. You will  soon be  well, if I do not talk you  to death. You are in "
""
funeral  of Thjoden; and  he was laid in a  house of stone with his arms and 
"     'More  Men  going to Mordor,' he said in a low  voice. `Dark faces.  We "
"all  fours like  a beast.  No, not  one shall be left, not even Grnma. Grnma  "
"and had no need for speed. For the hungry and worn, who had far to go before "
"blanket, and, whether you believe it or not, he wept until his eyes were red and his "
"Abel Martijn,4041374653646150,18-08-1992
"
' 
"Sanford Eagle,4041377219993,14-03-1991
"
""
have not come there yet. Indeed I see what you fear. But the darkness is not 
""
jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. 'I keep a treasure or  
"even as  it  winged away into forgetfulness it heard voices, and they seemed "
to 
out of his reckoning. 
"held for  one more blow, and  before she could sink upon him, smothering him "
said quietly. 'Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to him. It was  a  
remnant of the Men in a wide ring of archers. 
"that the valour of the City was already beaten down, the  hidden Captain put "
"pavilions  and the  tables  and the chairs,  and the  spoons and  knives and "
with thick  legs and  large hands. They  were armed with short  broad-bladed 
"stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in  front  of him. The others followed;  but "
     'Peace!'  said Gandalf.  'The news of that grief should have  been told 
"soldiers would be coming down  from  the mountains; and goblins can climb  trees, "
after?' 
     Frodo looked  back for  a moment over  his shoulder. He could no longer  
those  times. With them  went many  Elves of the High Kindred  who  would 
"gone, and there is no more to be said.  But the Tower  of  Orthanc now  goes "
     But the Gaffer did  not convince  his audience. The  legend  of Bilbo's 
"Sharia Zamorrano,4041376549341,29-12-1992
"
"Evita Taysbil,4580160298136,30-09-1975
"
when I first listened to it.' 
those who go with it must  not  count on their  errand being aided by  war or 
the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady. 
"     The Riders were still  in the low valley before the  mouth of the Coomb, "
     'To Isengard?' they cried. 
eyes glittered. 
     As the   light grew stronger  it showed  a silent shrouded world.  Below 
"     'Yes, every Baggins. All peoples  that  keep the Precious. We must have "
"their blood;  and the others cursed  him, calling him outlaw and  traitor to "
"Oin and Gloin began to fight. That settled it. ""After all we have got a burglar with "
partly screened by curtains; and a chair and two stools were brought  there. 
####-led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared. 
one that it is right to cleave!' 
"he said.  `As  all your  unpleasant  advice has been  good, I wonder if this "
smoke blown away on the wind!' 
"Bilbo's  path,  and  he  looked  back.  Then  he  looked  forward  and  could  see  before "
"are not in that valley now, and if we came  on a spring  it would be flowing "
of 
"first it seemed a long way off,  but it drew  nearer:  it was coming towards "
jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in front were bowed 
"Kass Atwater,4041596580116572,15-05-1996
"
"Steward Wiskar,4041374664674183,03-12-2001
"
"     `Yes, let  us go,' said Frodo. `But  if you can only speak ill of those "
 
Mordor  
"Fairleigh Audenis,4041372426638280,15-10-1994
"
"good  deal,  and  the  bands  of  yellow  on  their  deep  black  bodies  shone  like  fiery "
"said grimly to  himself,  as  he sheathed Sting and turned  from  the brazen "
company go by. 
"orders. 'We go at once to Meduseld, the  hall of your master, Thjoden,' said "
     Chapter 6   The Forbidden Pool   
and heard no voice. and did not move. 
"language  of  Orthanc  help  means ruin, and  saving means  slaying, that is "
"     'Jowyn Jomund's daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed away!' "
"longer devouring him; he began  to revive a little.  He  felt  old , terribly "
"breakfast laid as soon as we went out."" "
"Wallis Mounch,4120903944352972,20-11-1985
"
furnaces far  below  its ashen  cone would grow hot and with a great surging 
papers in front of him. He looked indisposed - to see Sackville-Bagginses at 
Thorin  had  been  caught  much  faster  than  they  had.  You  remember  Bilbo 
"battle going on, or soon would be, and that  you were in it, and might never  "
"""That won't be till Smaug's dead,"" said Bilbo glumly. ""In the meanwhile where "
"terrified,  and I  turned  back,  and was  just  going  to  bolt  home, when "
"     'If this is bewitchment,' said Thjoden, 'it seems to me more  wholesome "
"out of my sleep sudden and all  and finding him at hand. I said I was sorry, "
"autumn, when Frodo called Sam into the study. "
"why he did so, or what he hoped  for, ran  along the path crying help! help! "
"for Grand!' they  shouted, and the old man smiled.  They knew him by  sight, "
shapes: names Pippin  guessed of great men and kindreds that had once  dwelt 
here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he 
wrong.  It is Orcs that they hate.  For they  do not  belong  here and  know 
 
"gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. gut  for my part I will "
     where grey the Norland waters run. 
"we still are,  while  all  the gardens of the Entwives are  wasted: Men call "
"with a whip, and then  it  turns into Sam! Then I wasn't  dreaming after all "
####-     For there were  the servants of  Denethor with  swords and  torches  in 
"big, I think, really; but  in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round "
"now, so near, so near.' He  broke  off  and lifted his eyes above the River, "
"""I will give you a name,"" he said to it, ""and I shall call you Sting."" "
"Ithilien, and many captains and knights. Never had any king of the Mark such "
"had  seen Gandalf or  had some  news of him, but would not say anything in a "
"fell meats, until  it grew beyond the measure of all  other things that fly; "
"cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through  openings  Frodo "
said in a whisper. `These lights? They're all  round us now. Are we trapped?  
This is  no time for  hobbit pertness. Thjoden is a kindly old man. Denethor  
"horrible  thought  that  the  cakes might  run  short,  and  then  he-as  the host: he knew "
"away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.' "
plainly that she  thought the Gamgees  capable of plundering the hole during  
globe had been  filled with moonlight and hung before  them  in a net woven of  the 
"shadows were still long they were off again. So they rode now for two more days, "
"####-     'And now they're gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the woods "
made  by  spider-webs one behind  and over  and  tangled with  another. Suddenly he 
"happening.  But  not just  now, and not from  me: I have too  many  pressing "
roots far below.  
"""O  very  well,""  said  Thorin.  ""Long  ago  in  my  grandfather  Thror's  time  our "
"ever. Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou "
""
"     An Orc  seized Pippin like a sack. put its head between his tied hands,  "
""
Now  far below  the goblins and  the wolves were  scattering  far and wide  in  the 
 
"and they met no  danger, and heard nothing, and  saw nothing  but the  faint "
"you saw,  Jomer. Few other  griefs amid the  ill  chances of this world have "
"Legolas,  and Merry  in front of Aragorn. Presently they were riding swiftly  "
"terrible than all these, but they had no name. "
""
     'When  the  Ents  had reduced a large part  of  the  southern walls  to 
"Dark  Years  few tales  have come. But still she was  there, who  was  there "
them to take this way; for at a place a few days' ride due north of the Carrock was 
"Dulciana Triplow,4506862637773445,11-06-1986
"
flowers;  and from Dol Amroth came the harpers that harped most skilfully in 
"watchful eye on every movement of  his,  supporting him if  he stumbled, and "
"Ferdinande Mariner,4041598786259,10-11-1989
"
to  creep  near  the  lights  and  find  out  more  about  them.  But  then  they  could  not 
a whistle  or not? Or was  it the  call of some strange  bird?  If it was  a  
"or  whatever its  name is, might  be it, till Gimli spoke his piece.  A fair "
"land. They are elvish robes certainly, if that is what  you  mean. Leaf  and  "
"of  Rivendell.  That is  troll -country,  and  little known  to  me. We could "
"We've never seen him, but he's up at Bag End; and he's the real Chief now, I  "
"Davine Chatel,4017959224742,14-09-1998
"
"to the westward; there its long grey  slopes, though broken, were not sheer. "
"them and their names, for under them lies  Khazad-dym, the Dwarrowdelf, that "
"     It seemed  to Frodo  then  that he  heard,  quite  plainly but far off,  "
"know  too well.  It belongs to  Sauron and was  made by  him  alone,  and is "
####-stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!' 
and then followed his master. 
"As they stood pointing and speaking to one another Thorin hailed them: ""Who "
step with a white beard and a scarlet hood; and he too hopped inside as soon as the 
laboured  to wash and pare away all the foul scrawls that orcs  had put upon  
"and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great  River lay like a "
and the shrivelled face became rags of skin upon a hideous skull. Lifting up 
Wish I'd a'put that mail -shirt on!' 
"known  that  they  were  at  last  drawing  towards  the  eastern  edge,  and  would  soon "
"rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as  he could guess "
"through the old  tunnel,  and the  water was rapidly rising up the steps. We "
"     The old man's flat face and dark eyes showed nothing, but his voice was "
""
"of  the Captains of the West, and thither the  thought of the Dark Tower was "
"rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious  -- gollum!'  He lifted his "
better  that we could  reach before nightfall.  At least we are out of sight 
"the banner -bearer who  lay  dead, and he lifted it up. Slowly Thjoden opened "
valiant man.' 
"in  spite  of  an  empty  stomach,  as  he wiped  his  sword  on  the  grass  and  put  it  back "
said in a hoarse whisper. 'I saw them. Do you think they  could see us? They 
"Randene Roubert,4007126474692,19-05-1989
"
"can't explain. I was half asleep when you began,  and it seemed to follow on  "
merely to wait  for  the dawn and let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on 
"hideous shape appeared: a horseman, tall,  hooded, cloaked in black. Slowly, "
"bringing up memories  of wind,  and trees, and sun  on the  grass, and  such "
"the  gates,  but  be  could  sometimes  get  out,  if  he  was  quick.  Companies  of  the "
"this time of day,  it would  be the right Thain of the Shire and no upstart. "
"     Next day Frodo woke  early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along  "
"Elsinore De Marchi,4017959574526497,07-11-1986
"
"     'I am  deeply grateful,' said  Frodo;  'but  I  wish you would  tell me "
     'Forgive you?' said the wizard. 'Tell me first what you have done!' 
"the slope of the pit, but that did not ease the sense  of burden that was on "
you too. You won't escape by skulking here.' 
few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.' 
proved too great a strain.  The door burst in pieces.  Something  dark  as a  
""
do  not doubt that Wormtongue at home  wrapped their  meaning in terms  
be easy to find him: we only need wings ourselves!' 
"     'It is locked,' said Treebeard. 'I made Saruman lock it and give me the "
"Glynis O'Fallone,4041595066663,06-06-1994
"
"####-     'The  Stones of Seeing do  not lie, and not even  the Lord of Barad-dyr "
"forest,' he  shouted, pointing ahead. 'Get to it! It's your  best hope.  Off "
"once like a screech-owl, and we will do what we can."" "
"to try, no.' "
"     `He is lured here, you  say? ' said  Faramir in  a low voice. `Can  he, "
worm called Smaug. One day he flew up into the air and came south. The first we 
"chewing, they did not ask or like to think. "
"three  store-rooms  in different  places nearby,  above the flood-level. But "
but find the men. 
this debate?' 
clashed  together  when  the  last  elf  passed;  yet  he  did  not  dare  to  march  among 
lands! Things of great sorrow and renown have come to pass. Shall we weep or  
us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.' 
"     Now for wrath, now for ruin and a red nightfall! "
"this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can eat  him. Now see him off!"" "
     In the meanwhile  the host made  ready for  the return to Minas Tirith. 
"     'You choose  well,' said Thjoden; 'and I give him now gladly. Yet it  is "
"Katha O'Corren,4041597589101698,04-09-1991
"
"     'All right, Sam,' said Cotton.  'Choose a  lad or two, and go and fetch "
"times, deeply and peacefully, either trusting Gollum or too tired to trouble "
"Brandy  Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck,  and settled  down  to  become "
"to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel "
     With those ill-boding words the third day closed since  Pippin came  to 
"reached  him.  But  Bilbo's  heart  fell,  both  at  the  song  and  the  talk:  they  sounded "
"day,""  said  the  man  leading  the  way  through  a  dark  door  that  opened  out  of  the "
good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.' 
"little, wishing them  good speed; and then she gave the cup to Aragorn,  and "
"Gino Wanklin,4041379390352822,07-11-1984
"
rampant nettles and  thistles.  A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and 
"     'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,' said the leader  of the men, 'and "
"another thing that's  bothering  him. If  he  screws himself up to go, he'll "
""
"Flossie Medendorp,4041591092507,21-08-1995
"
"Berton Darcey,4041373442680,15-02-1995
"
"wholesome. The North will be freed from that horror for many long years, I hope. "
"     `Well,' cried Legolas as he ran up, `I have not brought the Sun. She is "
and streamed in long braids behind them; their faces were stern and keen. In 
"inside,  and  there were no  trees  except  three  very tall  and  beautiful "
"preparing,  I  suppose,  some  last  blast  of magic  before  the  end.  That  did  not  seem "
"did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight, and the  early night "
"He  stopped,  and  he  could  hear,  when  he  listened  hard,  drops  drip-drip-dripping "
"her duty, had not restrained her lips; you might have heard even such things "
"     'Meaning  we're not, I take you,' said Sam. `Thank you kindly. And when  "
     'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' said 
"couple of  ponies in the vi llage, or even one  just for the baggage? I don't  "
"Eventually,  after  a week  or  two  of  this  sneaking  sort  of  life,  by watching  and "
southward. Far away and almost straight ahead there was a red glow under the 
more closely.  Across the court a  great door at the foot of the Tower stood 
"Krisha Lilywhite,4041591872312,27-04-1996
"
"     from northern waste to southern hill, "
"fell on him, as he looked down  that  avenue of kings  long dead. At the far "
"`Yes: I found him some way up the hill,  and I spoke to  him. I urged him to  "
disquieting. It seemed that the  evil power in Mirkwood had been  driven out 
"very  peculiar. Always a bit more to discover,  and no  knowing  what  you'll "
"had  been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and  that somehow  it had "
"Edik Mudge,4041370681504,17-10-1976
"
""
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a  
"was not thrown b Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I think. It came  "
"Kayle Le Strange,4041377039037,24-09-1990
"
"day-guards, evil-eyed and fell,  were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed "
     Gandalf in grief and horror turned his face away  and closed the  door. 
""
"""And you're a lout!"" "
     The  warmth  of  the orc-draught  had  gone. Pippin felt cold and  sick  
"Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free. "
"may, but they've got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as "
"     `Don't hurt  us! Don't let them hurt us,  precious! They won't hurt  us "
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane; 
"Jeniece Longbone,4850158282489045,07-07-1997
"
grey light lay on the land. 
the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang clear as he chanted in the 
"King  of  All  Birds  and  wore  a  golden  crown,  and  his  fifteen  chieftains  golden "
in shadow: it  is difficult to see  them moving. But  they do. They can move 
"misty plain below.  Merry and  Pippin,  separated by a  dozen  Orcs or more, "
"Thorpe Ector,4017957726243,27-04-1991
"
"grass,  and  at  first  he  thought  they  were  the  dead  branches  of  trees.  That  third "
"Blondell Emnoney,4237076539182,28-01-1976
"
     Chapter 7   Homeward Bound  
would first search most thoroughly. Only when he was well north of the Tower  
added in the high-elven speech. 
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove. 
back 
"     When he woke up the sky above was dim, not lighter but darker than when "
winding stair at the back of  the  store-room that brought  us out on top of 
is the friendship of their kind. Come!' 
"back  then; but where they have all gone to  now, I  don't  know. It  was  a  "
"     '""I don't care,"" said Deal. ""I have  given  you a present already, more "
overflow. All along the Bywater Road every tree had been felled. 
""
"often conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It "
I've used  eyes  and feet  and  nose since then. l  know  other  ways.  More 
"     'Now, now, Mr.  Brandybuck, don't go reminding me of  that! But  there,  "
"(nearly  all  of  them  had  already  disappeared  through  the  dark  trap-door), and get "
"     When at last he  had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for  some  time. "
"you have done to me. You can  have rest and food here for a while, until you  "
"     'Look,' he said, pointing downwards.  "
hidden 
"Briant McMorran,4041376019972,19-05-1984
"
"will. You see, I haven't much time for the selection and the arrangement and "
"     'Hm! Here we are!' said Treebeard, breaking his  long silence.  'I have "
idea of handing  it on  to someone else's care  - and  that  only at an early 
"     Each year at summer's end I go to find them for her, "
"Zonda Ropp,4041370168188415,29-07-1996
"
"that  had  dwelt  there had been destroyed in  battle,  and the  Nazgyl were "
"small token only of your friendship  Sauron asks this,""  he  said: ""that you  "
"the door to a passage through the middle  of the turret. The door  was open, "
far away  there came  a light in the eastern sky: it  flashed and faded many 
believe in the Dragon and less easy to believe in Thorin in these wild parts. Indeed 
company?  And  why  on  earth  did we  behave so foolishly: we ought to have 
"Dorelia Doxsey,4017956917099182,10-06-1996
"
"     'Well,'  said Frodo, 'Orcs or  no, if  it's the only  way, we must take "
it would last. 
"a glance at Pippin.  'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, "
is such a bother.' 
level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the water and carried up. They 
"out:  that passage yonder by which you entered  blindfold,  and  through the  "
"Tildie Vondracek,4041371361170234,11-01-1999
"
"     'My son, your  father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear, as "
"mean to  say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on  after all  those "
"amazement and anger to the  likeness of some wild beast that, as it crouches "
"These  must  have  been  written  on  a midsummer's  eve  in  a  crescent moon,  a  long "
"trees,  and  he  couldn't  wash  the  smell  off  his hands, my nice hands.' "
"in  these latter days fallen  from its  fullness  of old, the  leechcraft of "
     'Well!'  said Gandalf at last.  'What are you  thinking about? Have you  
"It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many "
"leaves and burst into golden flowers  in April. It was indeed a mallorn, and "
     Shall take the hidden paths that run 
"Anestassia Aucott,4698252866741,26-12-1987
"
"for  the  moment.  When  the  silence  that  followed  had  become  uncomfortable,  he "
""
"but the bricks were used to repair many an old hole, to make it snugger  and  "
"'It  is get ting late,  and  I  don't like this  hole: it makes my heart sink  "
"over.  We'll try to deal with them  neatly, but  we must be prepared for the "
and wide and filled  with shadows and half lights; mighty pillars upheld its 
"all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.' "
"grovelled, and  turned and made off. But at that something snapped: suddenly "
"     Within the shadows of her hair, "
"languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards "
waited.' 
"telling Dain of what had passed, and bidding him come with wary speed. "
"Soon the light of the burning was faint below, a red twinkle on the black floor; "
"     `The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the "
And yet never grows?  
"hoot  like  an  owl,  they  started  off  one  by  one  to  creep  towards  the  light  as  quietly "
"Cele Johnsey,4041372298323,04-04-1976
"
and disappeared. 
"him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy.  And even if we could, soon or late the "
"     At once he set off with  long  deliberate strides  through  the  trees, "
blazing  brand.  It flared with a  sudden white radiance like lightning; and 
"return,  and  see  if  you  have  brought  from  the  hoard  the  portion  that  is  to  be  set "
crash  and  clamour  of the battle  on the Rock rose  loud  again.  But  the 
"he soon  realized  that  if anything was  to be done,  it would have  to be done by Mr. "
the waist like a warrior and girded with a sword. 
"him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to  any  point on the borders "
"""Mind  Bilbo  doesn't  eat  all  the  cakes!""  they  called.  ""He  is  too  fat  to  get "
"     '""I have just come round to see how  you are faring, my lads,' he said; "
"     ' ""Saruman,"" I said, ""I  have  heard  speeches  of this kind before, but "
to leave the Great River  above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it finds 
"with that they leapt away, riding down the Coomb like thunder, while all the "
some of his younger cousins began to grow up. 
had died and laid aside the Quest. 
"     They  followed what was  left of  the road from  the gates  to Orthanc, "
about  her  finger; it  glittered like  polished  gold overlaid  with silver 
"####-     Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again.  'That is a song,'  he "
     'I wonder where Isengard is?' said Pippin. 
would  he have been  to know its fate who wrought  it slowly long ago in the  
     Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling. 
"desires to test my will  upon it,  to see if I could not wrench it from  him "
"####-Bilbo  never  forgot  that  flight,  clinging  onto Dori's  ankles. He moaned  ""my  arms, "
     Sam looked  round.  `Where's Gollum?  ' he said. 'Hasn't he  come  back  
a  distance.  It was  plain  that many  people  regarded  them  now  as  the 
 
"set in another light, they were green as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow "
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.  
"Sheppard Newby,4467431574877,26-11-1993
"
clapping by the  elders;  and some loud  shouts of 'Frodo!  Frodo! Jolly old 
"laughed. 'And how do you know that we go the same way as you, for you do "
"Darleen Capstick,4041371869720373,17-06-2001
"
your counsel.' 
"up  in  black  smokes.  Ashes  and  cinders  were  in  the  eyes  of  the  dwarves,  and  the "
Will you have wine or beer? There's a barrel  inside there -- very passable. 
"     Even  as Gandalf and  Pippin  ran forward,  they heard from  within the "
"     'No, but I had to  badger  you,'  said Gandalf. 'I wanted the truth. It "
"were st ill there now, when the memory  of  the  old Kings had faded into the "
"Nikaniki Deeth,4017950526978977,24-12-1976
"
"what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. "
"to  follow, as it  turned  and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among "
things  are  ill  to hear  when  the  world's  in  shadow.  Sleep  till  the 
"he had gone and passed again into  the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer  "
"     'Nor me,' muttered Sam. "
"started, noticing the  stranger for the  first  time. 'Go  on!' said  Frodo. "
will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.' 
displease you?' 
"     `And in that case so is the Redhorn  Gate,' said Gandalf;  `and how  we "
"     spear shall be shaken, shie ld be splintered, "
"     They  lay still   for a while.  It  was too dark to  seek  for cover, if "
"they climbed higher  above  the stenches  of  the  unseen lair, and strength "
"     'My blood runs chill,'  said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his "
"Tony Sichardt,4041596721704,03-04-1999
"
"Imloth  Melui,  who stood beside  her. 'Those  are Periain , out  of the  far "
"     'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for your "
"straight  flight  from Barad-dyr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgyl  would take a  "
was in sight; and he led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley. 
"Laurent Gwioneth,4041370811077,11-07-1989
"
behind!  ' he yelled.  'Look  out  master!  I'm'  -- but suddenly his cry was 
"you, but to keep an eye on the ponies too. Beorn may be your friend, but he loves "
"####-guess little of their peril, if we should fail at last. "
"     'I  will go  along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of  private "
"Already  they  seemed  to  have  been  tramping  on, on,  endlessly  to  the "
but 
"and that was in the very year of the finding of this Ring: a strange chance, "
and  sitting  on  sawn  rings  of  the  felled  trees  in  a  great  circle.  There was  a  fire  in 
"     'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!' said Gandalf solemnly. `The time has come. "
"If any Hobbit stooped for a stone,  it was well to get  quickly under cover, "
"Cher Diegan,4087531595281,29-12-1989
"
find the firmer places where feet could tread without sinking  into gurgling 
"precious to me, though I buy it with great pain. "
"because, as I read the marks, he was carried to this point by  an Orc. Blood "
"grievous marks on him. He was a lean, starved, haggard thing, all  bones and "
"had been  checked  upon  its western  line, southward and northward. For the "
"Carl Deveril,4101274058440125,06-09-1992
"
"Lady Jowyn, daring  to  smite  that deadly  thing. But  these  evils can  be "
     Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together! 
"guest they say.' He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment "
""
"or  even  further and to worse places?""  He  used to say  that  on  the path "
"     'I am called Strider,' answered Aragorn. 'I came out of the North. I am "
get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur's hand and betrayed him; 
flowered in the sky.  And  Aragorn the King Elessar wedded Arwen Undumiel 
"twinkling.  But  I stayed  for a  while, for  it seemed strange, and then  I "
""
"awake early this morning, and now it must be nearly noon.' "
"and  the  sage  and  the  marjoram,  and  the  yellow  rockroses  all  vanished,  and  they "
"     'Then tie me on  to the back of one,  or let me hang  on a  stirrup, or  "
Go!' 
"it may  not. Do  you think he's gone to fetch  them, Orcs  or  whatever they "
"the earth. 'The Orcs have been on this ground,' he  said. 'Otherwise nothing "
"Kathye Scedall,4017958326472,28-08-1989
"
side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?' 
but it seemed high and far away. as if seen through great deeps of air heavy 
"enough, may need  to strike no  more.  So the forces that he has  long  been "
had  drunk  and  bathed  their  feet.  There plain for all  to see were  the 
gems the name And®ril and the lineage of the sword. 
"Maurise Raper,4017954713087,24-10-1981
"
"Carmine Orkney,4017954268099182,28-05-1989
"
""
"before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out since I first stowed "
"Ely Klejna,4041374414142283,27-10-1993
"
forth as the sky faded. 
"""In lots of ways,"" said Gandalf. ""But in what way this one has been hidden we "
"The  air  grew warmer between the green walls of hillside  and hillside, and "
"and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur's heir of Gondor.' "
"     Biggest of all, "
the 
"Paige Dinsmore,4038993936042,04-05-1997
"
"and in  greed, for he will think that in  such rashness he sees the pride of "
"he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he could see and hear "
is he? I would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he is not up on the Mountain 
o' er shaken pool under heavens cool 
"destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your "
"promised, or listen to your herb-lore.' He closed his eyes, and Merry  bowed  "
Company.' 
"came  back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie "
what the man's name was and where he came from; and if he was really evil of 
a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast. 
"Jowyn as she lay, and he knew her. He stood a moment as a man who is "
speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen. 
"never meant things to come to this pass. He has been a wicked fool, but he's "
     The crownless again shall be king. 
"you! May his beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the rocks!"" he cried and "
"man was gone. There  was  no trace of him to be found near at hand, and they "
"searching  fingers, their roots  stood up from the ground like the  limbs of "
"the kings  failed or the Tree  withered in the court, a fruit must have been "
bottom: it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers that trickled 
"No,  one is  still  up, but he  rides  back to the others. That will be  the "
much 
"ten  times and five. They  have more.  Big fight, and who will win? And many "
"alive, and the River had most of those. But it was well for you, for if they "
"Ronna Cossor,4041377436704,09-10-1995
"
"the battle. 'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,' he thought, but "
waist. The rest he carefully coiled and put back in his pack. Beside that he 
"and they  were twisted round,  gently but irresistibly; then  two great arms "
"and tumbled  rock, pitted with  blackened holes, and  dotted  with posts and "
     The forge's fire is ashen-cold  
there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly shamed. Take your 
"township of the Shire, Michel Delving  on  the White Downs, there  were  now "
There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.  
may!' 
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards 
"####-be expected, and the men and their Master were ready to make any bargain for the "
"     '""Let me go away!"" he whined. ""Let  me go away! My messages are useless "
ruination.' 
     Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that  many of the 
"     'Like many that I saw at Isengard,' muttered Merry. "
stained with long travel. He had a  collar of silver in which a single white 
"back. But  I've  a bone to pick with you, in a manner  o' speaking, if I may "
"place, and longest preserved their ancestral habit of living in  tunnels and "
of a story of the Elf-Kingdoms. 'Do you  know any more  of that old lay that 
"They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say."" "
"Herrick Hallford,4017951517589013,16-08-1999
"
"made  many songs long ago, and still we sing them  in the North, remembering "
"introduce them before, but here they are."" "
"that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but  all blades perish "
"have  you:  two halflings,  and a host of men at  my  call, and the  Ring of "
Elves delighted to honour them. 
"so, Sam, when things are in danger: some one has to give them up, lose them, "
will was able to enter into the very heart of the City. 
along its flat grey stretches; for the Dark Lord  had almost  completed  the 
with that he woke up. 
"Giusto Deelay,4017950331175629,21-08-2001
"
further. He  felt that if once he went beyond the crown of the pass and took  
of cloud  like the fumes of a great burning. The  rising  sun  lit them from 
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song: 
the whole  of Bilbo's 'Translations from the  Elvish'. These  three  volumes 
"staggered, tumbling back. The outlet was blocked  with some barrier, but not "
     So passed  the  third day  of  their  journey with  Gollum.  Before the 
     He turned to Gollum. `Do you know where we are? ' he said. 
"Rube Neissen,4329668635443,30-04-1981
"
####-horn  and  shot  an  arrow  at  the  speaker.  It  smote  into  his  shield  and  stuck  there 
"last mortal  contest; and by Gil-galad only Cnrdan stood, and I. But Isildur "
through the Old Forest the `accident' at The Prancing Pony;  and his madness 
"When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered  if he had; for  it was  just as dark as "
"Riders hardly glanced at them.  The  P®kel-men they  called them, and heeded "
"of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is recovering.' "
"up they left the wall and walked into the road, blocking the way. "
"power, though  he is  not called a king. But he will  speak most to you, and "
"screened  by  the  low  hills  at  the  far  end  of  the  lake,  through  a  gap  in  which  the "
     'Put  it out! Put it  out!'  begged Merry.  The  branches of the wi llow 
"possible to carry-nuts, flour, sealed jars of dried fruits, and red earthenware pots of "
"on the mat, as Bilbo noticed with annoyance. "
near at hand. 
"red  and white.  Gandalf took no armour; and Gimli needed no coat of  rings, "
"     'If  I hear  not allowed much oftener,' said  Sam, 'I'm  going  to  get "
again now.' 
prospect. 
"     '""Why?"" said Deal. "
"Martha Deards,4366122748164,18-08-1975
"
"Gelya Remer,4017958195224037,06-02-1998
"
"""Dawn  take  you  all,  and  be  stone  to  you!""  said  a  voice  that  sounded  like "
towards  the Gap of Rohan; and Aragorn took leave  of them at last  close to 
the fire  in  the old kitchen  at  Bagshot Row was what he really wanted. An  
"Pennie Yearby,4380862155099349,29-05-2001
"
letter when Strider and Nob returned. 
"Darlleen Niblock,4041375584380,05-01-1979
"
rode back to battle together. 
 
"dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes,  "
"""Did we say so, precious? Show the nassty little Baggins the way out, yes, yes. "
"     Mr. Butterbur did  not seem  much put out. He reckoned,  very probably,  "
 
orc. 
and I used to come here with him a good deal at one time.' 
of the land!' 
"slip out with the precious prisoners  before the  battle. Treachery perhaps, "
"""Very  well,  O  Barrel-rider!""  he  said  aloud.  ""Maybe  Barrel  was  your  pony's "
"a last fair  morning.  Though your  service to him was brief, it should be a  "
"it  goes. There is a  connexion with Bilbo's  old adventures,  and the Riders "
     Aragorn and  Legolas went now with Jomer in the van. On through the dark 
other  dark  marks like old blood that little of  it could be  read. Gandalf 
"clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of "
than any other place in  the world. Many  of  the houses that they had known  
""
"impregnable, and its black rock was mirrored in the pool. "
sometimes they were loaded on to flat boats. 
"     beyond all mountains steep, "
""
"####-""Come along!"" he shouted. "
"book,  the Book  of Mazarbul, and look at  it  more  closely  later. You had "
closed in  qu ietly behind and followed them.  When the  Men reached the fire 
"minutes were precious, but one by one they escaped; and he could do nothing. "
indeed  on  the  same  passage. The  best  rooms were  all  on  the  left-hand side (going 
"""Come  in!  Come  in!""  said  Bilbo,  and  soon  they  were  settled  in  chairs  by  the "
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth ever came back. 
"Sarn  Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning, those are  still many  miles "
have never  failed me and always  I have  recovered you.  I had you  from my  father 
"they kept the laws of free will, because they were The Rules (as they said), "
"wisdom,  at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you  must therefore  use "
"sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came  down the wind, like  the  cry of "
"twice as loud as before, but not so delightedly.  "
"from  you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though  he little "
"the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.' "
"in foreign parts, chasing  Black Men  up  mountains from  what my  Sam says,  "
"chasm  that  the sky was  dark, and in it small stars  glinted. Yet as Gimli "
grown 
"says. ""I wouldn't call it that."" Still I see what she means. I feel torn  in "
Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the Ring of Doom.' 
"the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon "
"perilous  ventures.  But his life is charmed, or fate  spares him  for  some "
"Barrett Pullman,4017956303804,05-02-1990
"
"events: a bringer of evil, some now say. "
Chapter 8. The Road to Isengard 
camp.  Runners  came  in  to  report  that  a  host  of  dwarves  had  appeared  round  the 
"     `I would,' she said. `That is how it would begin. Bu t it would not stop "
worthy of trust.' 
content to chant  their beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives.  We 
like black spears. It will not  be long before we reach the  branching roads 
"Paule Wallicker,4057099329969,24-02-2000
"
maybe.' 
     are mirrored on the Shadowmere. 
"Jarrett Vian,4041377163710390,13-03-1999
"
Boromir away!' 
"     Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! "
"Farrah Hansel,4041597410265,07-09-1976
"
end the Shadow was  only a small and passing thing: there was light and high 
interrupted. Poor Bilbo couldn't bear  it any  longer. At may never  return he began 
"Ulysses Buggs,4017955922108574,26-10-1994
"
used to call them. I used to think that they were things  the wonderful folk  
     For  some time there was no answer.  At  last the window above the door  
"""Very well!"" said Bilbo very downcast, and also rather annoyed. ""Come  along "
"for him to see it  again, for  instance.  Otherwise,  he might  live on  for  "
"him.  No,  not  a  fair  fight.  He  was  invisible  now.  Gollum  had  no  sword. Gollum "
"grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on the  stones, and spouted out over  "
"     'I suppose  so,  Mr.  Baggins;  but  we have  to say  just  ""the Chief"" "
"Belfalas, to which Anduin runs, it is warm and merry, maybe, or would be but "
"     But then  he  got   up, and the  turn seemed to  pass, and he  was quite "
"face  as  an  elf-lord,  as  strong  as  a warrior,  as wise  as  a wizard,  as  venerable  as  a "
"pillars,  the only children  that Pippin had  seen  in Minas Tirith,  and he "
die. You can  use  even your grief as  a cloak.  Do you  think that I do not 
"     He turned. 'Come, Aragorn son of  Arathorn!'  he said. 'Do  not  regret "
"said, 'in the mode that  is called ann-thennath  among the Elves, but is hard "
"stones. They  wavered, broke, and fled  back; and  then charged again, broke "
"of Sorcery. Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of "
"passed beyond my help, or  the help of any of  the Company that set out from "
prepared to go over the edge a second time. 
"out of  the  Chetwood. The  land  had been falling steadily, ever since they "
"discovered,  that men had  come up  from  the  river  and  the  lake  and had  scaled  the "
may leave a weak thread. 
turned their faces away from the hills in the west. 
"Erinna Neem,4607060942097919,21-12-1984
"
"barred the gates, and then can  hold them long if , and then perhaps horrible  "
"that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf.  There is hope that way.  Its victory "
her breast rose  and  fell  beneath the white linen of  the sheet. Once more 
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his 
"Ruthy Pinare,4041599355633,20-11-1986
"
"Ginni Teaz,4041373828703789,22-09-1996
"
yet?' 
"it appear,' said Jomer, as the great horse ran up, until he stood before the "
"     As he ran the cries  came louder, but fainter  now and  desperately the "
"receive me as sword-thain, if not to stay by your side? And I would not have "
####- 
     Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour -floor. They pushed a  low 
vanished. I have  never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard 
"Tanhya Rafferty,4041371613704,27-05-1989
"
and  lights (even  the hobbit had never forgotten  the magic fireworks at Old Took's 
"trust in Jomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind.  To cast aside  regret "
like  the echo of all the joys he had ever  known. But he himself burst into 
"turned away.  A large squirrel,  maybe.  Perhaps  under  the  shadow of  the "
"Jemima Llorens,4041373069793895,12-06-1997
"
Silverlode. 
"     `No indeed, Master Samwise,' said Faramir, `for  I  am  not  learned in "
Thorin Oakenshield?' 
"and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver and gold, and all "
####-realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.' 
"after the  Common  Speech, the  Westron as it  was  named, that was  current "
"Rudyard Harbidge,4081410445379,13-07-1978
"
was not all along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.' 
"gigantic big bears, all dancing outside from dark to nearly dawn. They came from "
"""Easy!"" said Bilbo. ""Mountain, I suppose."" "
as a life-age of the earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all 
"Who  aroused  the  dragon  from  his  slumber,  I might  ask? Who obtained of us rich "
"     `Well, no, lord,' said the man. `No Orc at least. But I saw, or thought "
"and  stepped  away. 'Call  her!' he said, and  he passed  silently  from the "
"far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch  still stood, but it "
given a  
"as I wished, and let it go at that!"" "
he had  become aware that he was  speaking his thoughts aloud. `It  would be 
stopped  short.  They  could  not  see  a  sign  of  him.  He  had  vanished.  They  yelled 
cannot say how long ago.' 
"customs, now  of the Shire and the strange countries that  Pippin  had seen. "
"counsel you, lord, to forbid  his  staff? That fool, Hbma, has betrayed us!' "
must help me bear them.' 
"dangerous. You  are  beset with  dangers,  Gimli  son  of Gluin; for you are "
"     'Now,  I  daresay. But how  long? You fools! You should  have shot him.  "
slab.  He  pored over it  for  some time  without  speaking. Frodo and Gimli 
"Inside  the  passages  were  lit  with  red  torch-light,  and  the  elf-guards  sang  as "
uprushing flame in Gorgoroth. Then came a great crack of thunder. 
for this burden: sorry about everything.  Don't adventures ever have an end?  
"Dael Rodgerson,4041377012828,11-02-1994
"
present habitation and heart of that will now was: as certainly as a man can 
"     `I don't like his sneaking off without saying,' said Sam. 'And least of "
a  family-tree  that included  even the more  important members of the  more 
     'What did I tell you? Something's happening!'  cried Sam. '  (The  war's 
"Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours! "" "
"mist.  He sat  for a moment half dreaming, listening to  the noise of water, "
"'That's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there.' "
"to  help  them  out  of  difficulties.  ""I  am  not  going  to  disappear  this  very  instant,"" "
"of  Bree-hill,  and  then  it  began to run  swiftly downwards  into  wooded "
even as he  did  so  a hundred ladders were raised  against the  battlements.  
find someone who will tell us how things are round here.' 
praise but little help. Only from Rohan  now will any men ride to us when we 
"shapeless drifts of fog,  curling and  twisting  as it rolled over them  and "
"first time she doubted herself. She  guessed  that this tall man, both stern "
""
"full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the "
     Merry looked round in dismay and disgust. 'Let's get out!' he said. 'If 
"Pate Rosa,4015347881005151,19-04-1980
"
""
resting.  But  Aragorn saw  that he was pierced  with  many  black -feathered 
"     'We  will make ready to ride,'  said Thjoden; 'but let  word be sent to "
after-supper morsel. 
"either  side of them; and if  they looked  up  to the pale sky,  they caught "
"things even  in  that land  of  vigilance could have espied them, save  from "
daresay it will be homelike  enough. The Pony is a good inn by all accounts.  
"espied. It  is a place of  sleepless malice, full of lidless eyes. Do not go "
"Bilbo saw that the time had come to explain his idea, as far as he could; but he "
bumped  his  nose  on  the  pony's  neck.  Their  spirits  rose  as  they  went  down  and 
####-are hewn up and  carried off to feed  the fires of Orthanc. There is always a  
Riders charged from  the East; the red  light gleamed on mail and spear. The 
     'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!' muttered Pippin.  'I wish I 
"Angel MacGillivray,4041377433078081,09-11-2001
"
"Pheriannath , the Prince of  the Halflings, that folk had  called him; but he "
"son to ask for wrights of  the Mountain. But  men are better than gates, and "
"     'I think that  the  enemy  brought his  own enemy  with  him,' answered "
"     In a case in the hills he dwelt alone, "
"believed,  and in such dwellings they still  felt most at  home; but  in  the "
"     There were no clouds overhead yet,  but a  heaviness was in the air; it "
     The heart of  Legolas was running under  the stars of a summer night in 
"friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count on it "
"face of  the  chief guard next day,  even  though Bilbo, before  they went on,  stole  in "
 
"him in, and set him in his chair, and put little Elanor upon his lap. "
went into the trees on the right. 
"now, and when that's over things may be easier.' "
"And then all the host of Rohan burst into song, and they sang  as they slew,  "
"time,  and only at need. For these things  are given to  serve  you when all  "
ago  in  the old days when such rings were still at  large  in  the world? Perhaps even 
"Ike Kmietsch,4041378564063165,09-06-1977
"
"silks  and linens, nor any armour or heraldry  could be more honourable. But "
"from Ithilien and from Anurien, ambushing and pillaging. This is a great war "
"     'To  me?' said  Saruman. 'Nay, pray do not smile  at me! I prefer  your "
"over  his  aching brow. The hideous vision had  seemed so real to  him, half "
"table,  and  the  hobbits  disappeared  through  one  of  the  inner  doors. "
"None shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in my brief hours "
####-of  memory.  The light  and music  of  Rivendell was about  him again. Bilbo 
they  were talking. Every now  and again they made efforts to speak of other  
     Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk  of a tree: it 
"Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the  rest are prisoners. Lay down "
""
"folk are going our way, then we will  take another. Get on, or I'll give you  "
"it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: ""A hobbit."" "
"     `Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last  Alliance? Not wholly so, "
"     'Not Orcs,' said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he had "
"     'It was indeed, Mr.  Frodo. I'd given up  hope, almost. I couldn't find "
Both you and Bilbo are wanted.' 
"and  now  he  was  left  alone  again,  running  round  putting  the  finishing  touches-to "
"     'A beautiful, restful  night!' said  Merry to Aragorn. 'Some folk  have "
"doorstep,  and every path was  its  tributary. ""It's  a dangerous  business,  "
""
"     'But it is still dark,' said Gimli. 'Even Legolas on a  hill-top  could "
"Jyoti De Banke,4017958934713,03-04-1994
"
"     'I don't wonder,' said Merry, 'and I wish you could. But we are envying "
is  can no longer be discovered. The  beginning of Hobbits lies  far back in 
"####-Steward  of  Gondor, and Prince of  Ithilien, asks that  Jowyn Lady of Rohan "
"Denny Woodard,4041590811106395,15-08-1997
"
"lore: Bid  Aragorn remember  the words  of the  seer,  and the Paths of  the "
""
     with thane and captain rode Thengel's son: 
"     It was Sam's turn that day  to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined "
"and all that went with you. And  if it were possible, one would  say that at "
it or no.' 
"it on the road, until they came to Morgul Vale, and never had he used it for  "
"faces. I almost feel that  I dislike you  both, but do  not let us be hasty. "
     'Let you? Make you?' sa id the  wizard.  'Haven't you been  listening to 
"simply come  down on us in force, corner us, and  then drive us out, or burn "
"said in answer to his look. 'He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.' "
"""Farewell!"" he cried to them. ""We may meet again as friends."" "
""
"kings, terrible and splendid;  and some  as merry as children. And the music "
"mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer  "
"####-you may not see him.' He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out "
to be rescued. Bind their legs!' 
"though it may touch them  sorely  ere the year is much older,' said Aragorn. "
""
"following  the  guards  and  taking  what  chances  he  could,  he  managed  to  find  out "
"     It  is quite cool,' said Gandalf. 'Take it!' Frodo received  it  on his "
"     Wonder came into the man's eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the  "
"Marcello Odegaard,4591215194210721,22-01-1993
"
Number Three; and he said often and did not care who heard it: 
 
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done. 
"Denny Malloch,4041593116635,11-03-1981
"
"Amabelle Coxen,4041596273978346,17-03-1989
"
Then the stars went in and out-they were  cut off by things with wings. Very 
have been  here lately. It  is  they who left the firewood behind. But there 
"with hail  and lightning,  and  casting its shadow upon  Minas  Tirith  with "
"Thom Mapples,4041370829576768,29-06-1975
"
"the  table,  or  round  and  round  the  ceiling;  but  wherever  it  went  it  was  not  quick "
"####-""Goblins?"" said the big man less gruffly. ""O ho, so you've been  having trouble "
""
"first of  Sam and Rosie's children was born on the twenty-fifth of  March, a  "
"new-risen  sun. 'I see a  white stream  that comes down from  the snows,' he  "
absence his  house  is left with little guard. But scouts warned me  of  the 
honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shirefolk; and do not grudge him 
the  hobbit went  back one day down  the valley and scrambled among  the  tumbled 
"     'Nay, it was not so,' said Faramir.  'For his works  fill the heart with "
"dare to interfere, Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked beside Sam, who "
"     As Elrond entered and  went towards  the seat prepared for  him, elvish "
"     `Good-bye, master,  my dear! ' he  murmured. 'Forgive  your Sam.  He'll "
own. What it is I do not know.' 
their enemies were flying and  the power of Mordor was scattering  like dust  
bushes  they  came  on  a  big  door  of  stone  leading  to  a  cave.  But  they  could  not 
home in the West. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.' 
again in the very  cleft where  he had  put  on the Ring  and seen Shagrat's 
"     `And then you must take some sleep,' said Frodo. "
"winds, and his song and thought ran through the woods  on both sides  of the  "
new mill in all its  frowning and  dirty ugliness:  a  great  brick building 
as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But 
"     Suddenly Gimli, who  had pressed on ahead, called back  to them. He was "
"back he had  to go with  them. As you have heard  some of  the  events  already, you "
"     `High time!  ' thought Sam. 'And time we parted,  too.' Yet it  crossed "
your courage and  sense; and  I am  sending Mr. Baggins with you.  I have  told you 
"land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought the image of those "
"`I  always imagined  that as one journeyed  south it got warmer and merrier,  "
shrouded in the mists of Mordor. 
was  so  exhausted-he was  the  fattest  and  had  been  constantly  pinched  and  poked-
"####-imagining,  spring out in  pursuit. Too little did he or  his master know of "
do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way.' 
speak of them. 'And never  before has  a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf 
There  was  a  buzzing  and  a  whirring  and  a  droning  in  the  air.  Bees  were  busy 
"lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!"" "
"hand,  and  Gloin  with  a  bundle  of  others  under  his  arm.  Quickly  Bilbo  trotted  to "
"Tiebold Bader,4041370725855,10-01-1994
"
"enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too  have become more like  to them, and "
"poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall, down into "
"####-with your trees and choke all other living things. But there  it is, Saruman "
"Fanya Grinley,4041378117114614,13-08-1978
"
"Jillie McMechan,4041373902036593,17-04-1980
"
invitations.  
####-seemed  to  form  the  letters of a flowing  script. They  shone  piercingly 
     Frodo peering  forward saw in the distance two great rocks approaching:  
"Rohirrim, others  held westward to hold off the forces of Gondor and prevent "
was  alone and felt rather forlorn`  although  all  about  him  the  folk of 
"about  them,  -  and  once  in  a while members  of  the  Took-clan would go and have "
"visible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could  "
""
"between  the  arms  of  the  Mountain,  seeking  for  the  foe.  Their  banners  were "
"Bernie Cordel,4041596125960179,05-07-1989
"
shimmering arms. Distant but deep there came up on the wind a  roaring sound 
""
long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke. 
     And she took  a white gem like a star that lay upon her  breast hanging 
in token of farewell. Then he got up as if to depart.  But suddenly he stood 
"     At Helm's Gate, before the  mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock  "
"Strider  the Ranger  had joined the  mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as "
"twilight like living towers. In  their, many-tiered branches and amid  their "
moor where the wind hissed through the  heather. Then with one glance at the 
"side. In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars "
     `Lothlurien! ' cried Legolas. 'Lothlurien! We have come to the eaves of 
"     'Go, Jowyn sister -daughter!' said the  old king. 'The time for  fear is "
"his ent-house, the sound of the Moot was faint. "
"above,  and  the  air  smelt  sweeter.  Before  them  light  came  dimly  through  great "
"     'Thank'ee indeed, Mr. Cotton, and I'll never forget it,' said Sam. 'But "
"settling steadily  on  Frodo's  heart, and he regretted now with every  step "
""
other directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of the 
     'But  our  whole  life for  months  has been  one long meddling  in the 
"Thomasine Akred,4041376038473358,17-12-2000
"
"a crack.  The keystone of the  arch  crashed almost on  their heels, and the "
"     The hobbits remained flat on  the  ground, as  Grishnbkh had left them. "
"disappeared, buried su ddenly under angry  foam.  Those that were behind drew "
     Sam hurried  to  the house. By the  large round  door at the top of the 
"     Saruman turned  to go, and Wormtongue shuffled after  him.  But even as "
"underfed, and dispirited  animal; but  it did  not look like dying just yet. "
"     'Look!' he  cried, and  they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood "
above  the  rim  of Earth. At  that  very moment  he  heard  a  sharp crack behind him. 
"upon the breast; but  behind him he heard many calls,  as those out of doors "
"Still  at whiles as  the  morning wore away  they would speak,  murmuring in "
stairs head. Then suddenly with clear voices they spoke a courteous greeting  
"     The Nazgyl came again, and  as  their  Dark Lord now grew and put forth  "
"as he groped  in vain in the dark, he put  his hand on  a ring, lying on the "
"peacefully,  one  hand  behind  his  head, and  the other  resting  upon the "
Three times he whistled; and then  faint and far off it seemed to  them that 
not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril.  and you would not have 
it.' 
"making; but when the  Rings  were debated  in the Council, all that he would  "
again. He shivered. 
"did not  look at them.  The way is shut, his voice said again It was made by "
"""Because  it  is  too  small.  'Five  feet  high  the  door  and  three may walk  abreast' "
fell ever downwards towards the plain. On this western side there were fewer signs 
"Alvina Chafer,4041373303494,21-08-1978
"
along any time now.' 
"deep, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in body and in  heart.' He "
"rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds advanced, sending  out "
"Hobbits must stick together, and especially  Bagginses. All I  ask in return "
"     'What  about the Elves?'  said  Sam, too  excited  to trouble about the "
"that  even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or  "
deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On the land of 
"Even if I were such a man as  to desire this thing, and  even though I  knew "
three companions were bending  over  him.  'What has happened? Where is  the 
"Fabian Maccrea,4041375014796493,20-09-1999
"
murder before now. I read it in him.' He sighed. 
the sun  fell from the sky down into the  West. Looking  out  over the great 
"do  actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In  fact long  "
striking  snake  he  charged  into  the Company  and  thrust with  his spear 
and  strangled  with  ivy  and  hung  with  lichen  to  bear  more  than  a  few  blackened 
"did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.' "
"####-hurled  against  the  wall and  pinned.  Sam,  with  a  cry, hacked  at  the "
"     'All ways  are watched, yes,' said Gollum.  `Of  course they  are.  But "
"content, if logs are contented. "
stepping  proudly:  and  proudly the people of the  City looked  on them and 
"filled with turbulent waters. Paths were few and winding, and led them often  "
"     returned in triumph; nor the tall bowmen, "
"Hetty Biggerstaff,4017959975087,23-11-1997
"
were perilous.  
sighed and fell silent. 
"can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.' "
"""None  to  be  seen  by  this  moon,""  said  Elrond,  and  he  gave  the  map  back  to "
"     'Cirith Ungol?  Morgul Vale?'  he said. 'The  time,  Faramir, the time?  "
 
     Elrond wen t forward and stood beside the  silent figure. 'Awake  little 
"life failed, it had an evil look. "
"that he forgot to keep his mouth shut. He loved maps, and in his hall there hung a "
"Merlina Bann,4017955717327,29-06-1987
"
"he lost has been found again; but he does not yet know where it is, or so we "
     'Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard?' asked Aragorn. 
squealed and fell down. 
can't we stop him?' 
Muil. Nor did Sam find any nook  or hollow  to shelter in: only  bare  stony 
"     'A  Ring  of  Power  looks   after  itself,  Frodo.  It  may  slip  off "
"     the setting sun, the rising sun, "
"""Of  course!""  said Thorin.  ""And  after. We  shan't  get  through  the  business  till  late, "
well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.' 
be brought back all the way to Bag-End Under-Hill. 
"wonderfully  refreshing. Very soon they  were  laughing, and snapping  their  "
the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night.  On both  sides of 
"inside Mr. Baggins and Balin, and you two Fili and Kili-the dragon shan't have all "
"     `Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin. while "
"     Frodo  followed them, feeling  very wretched.  They  went  through  the "
"punishment is just.  If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive,  it will  "
"from  the Mountain was  renewed with  redoubled  force,  and  upon  either  side men "
of Mordor. From the  North to  the field  of Dagorlad there is skirmish  and 
"     `Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,' said Faramir.  `I do not "
"one,  only  lit with  torches  on  the  trees  and  lamps  swinging  from  the  branches  and "
and partly (with the more Tookish part of his mind) because if he was going to be 
"Kelbee Mander,4581257124557,25-12-1994
"
     He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to 
lake  armed  as  if  for  war  and  elvish  bowmen  were  among  them.  At  length  the 
"Mordor, whose  power is  again stretching out over the world! We are sitting  "
     and dance upon the green. 
"####-     Suddenly  Frodo  noticed  that  a  strange-looking  weather -beaten man, "
"Edith Macveigh,4041372143802581,22-02-1992
"
"West Mash,4041590409601625,26-08-1999
"
"measured it,' said Gimli. "
####-     Pippin rode off with half  a dozen lads on ponies.  'See you soon!'  he 
"     'There are the doors before you,' said the guide. 'I must return now to "
signs and never know it.' 
east and cannot go further tonight.' 
"licked the  roof.  The throbbing  grew to a great tumult,  and the  Mountain "
within the courts are yet asleep.' 
####-     Bilbo laughed. `I have never known you give me pleasant advice before.' 
"fire-pits. Well nigh all the northern half of the Pelennor was overrun,  and "
     'I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the Orcs; but 
and bowed his head. But the King said.: 
come save  only to triumph over me when all is  won. He uses  others as  his 
     'Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far from the 
"     At length Frodo, groping along the  left-hand  wall, came suddenly to a  "
and the River. 
     In the wind from the Sea! 
"one, and not return, as far as I can see.' "
'Just  the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring  sunshine. 
as I bid. It is hard upon  the Dwarf to be thus singled  out. We will all be 
"them  without searching in  my mind. But on ly a few trials, I think, will be "
"Grange  on the  west side had been knocked down, and its place taken by rows "
"Babara Lahiff,4041371698509914,31-08-1992
"
loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.' 
crawled for hiding  underneath a  tangled  knot  of  thorns.  Their  twisted 
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!' 
"Barad-dyr  be thrown down, we shall not live to  see a new age.  But this, I "
"they  looked cold and unlovely.  On their  heads  were circlets, gold  chains "
unheard of!' he said. 'An  Elf  will go underground and a  Dwarf  dare not!' 
"     'But these creatures of  Isengard, these half-orcs and  goblin-men that "
especially in the tunnels  at Michel  Delving  and  in the  old quarries  at 
rather  vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told  the Council.  But they  
"     'Night lies over Isengard,' said Treebeard. "
     'That I ain't!'  said Sam.  'Nor Mr. Frodo. He's here and  his friends. 
in the woods and do  not hunt them like beasts any more. Ghvn-buri-Ghvn will 
plod   forward  with  bent backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still 
"     'No,' said Pippin, 'not yet. And even now his death might be prevented, "
"     He led the way, and following him  the  hobbits climbed  down into  the "
"ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't come, ring and shout!' "
"once more; for,  see! even the  Moon  is falling  into gathering  cloud. But "
fled  from  the  approach  of  their  torches  fluttering  in  the  draughts.  The  steps were 
"huts, and at once they came crowding up  to  the door of  Bag End. When they "
""
fear and a deadly  cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast winged 
in the middle of the night. There'll still be hours of dark then time enough 
 
the travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching three peaks that thrust  
"other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is  one of these that "
"Cyrill Obbard,4041371252164,13-05-1994
"
"It was  lit by a great red fire  in  the middle, and by  torches along  the walls, and "
"fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an a ffection for its new masters, "
"much older?' he wondered, and  then  he thought  how odd it was that he  had "
"that he  was watched from behind, he  thought he caught a brief glimpse of a  "
"Jackie Camamill,4017950358993706,19-05-1990
"
"Company,' she  said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made "
     He took from the box  a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard.  
"down. The  trees changed  to beech and oak, and hire was a comfortable  feeling  in "
"Ilse Kinchlea,4041595113630,20-08-1979
"
To  hunt  the  whole  mountain  till  he  had  caught  the  thief  and  had  torn  and 
"left, he led them to the throne, and  setting them upon it, he turned to the "
"     'Perhaps,' grunted Sam.  'Well, it  still  seems a long  way off, and a  "
####-sway. He longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the  green city. Then  
"cried Thorin in a loud voice from the door, before the captain could say anything. "
Roaring  he  swept  back  over  the  town.  A  hail  of  dark  arrows  leaped  up  and 
"had come in that way, he would have found himself in a dark rough tunnel leading "
to think of. He grew very weary. He always was hasty. That was his ruin.' 
"and Gloin, who were specially good at it. "
on his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out: 
"went up into the hills, not along the valley, I tell you.' "
"Curunnr stretched down to  meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the "
had sent armed soldiers to seize  them: no speed seemed too great  for these 
"too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all the pools, pale "
"through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other side. They were "
"willow!' And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a "
"Eberhard Mewitt,4017956343727,17-12-1976
"
north to south about the wall; and with him went the Prince of Dol Amroth in 
this matter it  would be well to  trust  rather  to their friendship than to 
"     With  that  he  fell asleep.  Legolas already lay motionless, his  fair "
"ready! But  you my guests-truly you  said, Gandalf, that the  courtesy of my  "
"been permitted to remain in Minas Tirith, since they were skilled in healing "
"     `Well, what's to be done with it? '  said  Sam.  `Tie  it up, so  as it "
"""Nonsense!""  said  Thorin,  recovering  his  dignity.  ""We  cannot  leave  them.  Get "
"rinds and crusts of hard grey bread. a torn black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed "
"Dr. Kareem Hackett,3684180733da1678, 27-12-1984
"
"""Very  well,""  said  Gandalf.  ""Take  us  where  and  as  far  as  you  will!  We  are "
"Torry Brecknell,4017956346357,18-06-1985
"
"remained  open;  all  the  other  gates  (except,  of  course,  the  small  secret  door)  had "
"some  little  return  should  be made  for  your,  er,  hospitality.  I mean  even  a  burglar "
Misty Mountains  loomed; ever darker  and taller they grew as the miles went 
"suffer, for indeed I have no gift that is  worthy; but my sister begs you to "
"####-the City and the tumult of the people,  and mounted to the Citadel; and they "
like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth. 
to me.' 
morning even a Black Rider that rode  up  and asked for Mr. Baggins would be 
     'But what can we do?'  cried Pippin miserably. He  was leaning on Merry 
####-go bubbling away down into the  valley. Tom Bombadil came trotting round 
a stumbling run. 
"along Pool Side, where the Hobbiton Road ran close to the bank. An avenue of "
plates and glasses. 
ravine  between the  dark arms  of  the mountains. Across the waste they saw 
anything coming?' 
"     `Come, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. `He's right, again. We can't stay here.' "
look was troubled. 
"the  near bank,  but  even as he  looked at  it, it  dived and vanished just  "
"Robinia Bareham,4041379565694198,28-08-2000
"
####- 
others that dwelt afar went back to their homes  rejoicing; but in the  City 
Esgaroth. 
'Gandalf! I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was  dead myself. Is 
"Nanette Toller,4041372948018,13-02-1991
"
would never have come at all! 
"Cross-roads.  Yes,  to  the  Cross-roads. That's the  way  over  ther e  yes, "
Dwarves  tell  no tale;  but  even as  mithril  was the  foundation of their 
"Florida Pavitt,4168992119219044,24-12-2000
"
"Clovis Morteo,4017958331597,13-10-1986
"
level  of  the  path  overhung with  bushes  and  low  trees.  In  one  of  these  dells  under 
     'And then whither?' said Legolas.  
"all my notes and  papers, and my diary too, and  take them with you, if  you  "
"was  pouring with  rain, and had been all day; his hood was dripping  into his eyes, "
"quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him  again.  The "
night-pools of Mirkwood?  ' 
"A  big  jug  of  coffee  bad  just  been  set  in  the  hearth,  the  seed-cakes were gone, "
"Walt Garthshore,4041596835334319,31-12-1993
"
"look  back  over  the  lands  they  had  left,  laid  out  behind  them  far  below.  Far,  far "
"     Now Galadriel rose  from the grass, and taking a  cup  from one  of her  "
"faintly,  passed over the  stream  in the midst of the valley, and went  on, "
"     'Yes, yess, longer,' said Gollum. `But not  so  difficult. Hobbits have "
"Riders had passed clear through  the ranks of  the   Southrons,  discomfiting "
"daughter  of Elrond,  in whom it  was said  that the likeness of L®thien had "
gathered there in strength. But the horsemen rode eastward to the succour of 
"more important for larger history. None of them was written by Peregrin, but "
 
     'King's man! King's man!' his heart cried within him. 'You must stay by 
"     `No, but I felt it, whatever  it was,' he answered. `It may be nothing, "
downs. The sun sank  and  the  shadows of evening fell  like a curtain. They  
     He could  not  answer the questions. He felt  cold and  sick.  'I  wish 
"     Then suddenly Denethor laughed . He stood up  tall  and proud again, and "
We feared then that  he had some news  of it  that we knew  nothing  of. But 
"     'All right, all right!' said Sam. ""That's quite enough. I don't want to "
"     `I  do  take  Smjagol under  my  protection,' said  Frodo.  Sam  sighed "
"hear that Dbin was  still  King under the  Mountain, and was now old (having "
that could be gathered in  haste; but the  brethren Elladan and Elrohir have 
     `What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. `It all seemed so dim somehow; 
its whistling voices were released. 
"Elle Dyka,4041375105854250,13-02-1993
"
"Mindolluin, still it would burn  your mind away, as the darkness grows,  and "
"slipping  backward, like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees,  sailing "
"     'Nothing else,' answered Aragorn. 'One who cannot cast away  a treasure "
"cried their praise, and  yet they were troubled in heart. For the  companies "
but  eastwards there was a golden  light  on the land.  It was but one  hour 
"of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden House. About them were gathered the "
round the house by the garden path and stood bowing low before them. 
"Harmony Halgarth,4041374181550,31-12-1985
"
he? 
"     'The Lady Jowyn,' said Aragorn, 'will wish soon to rise and depart; but "
He would have given also  an account of his party and disappearance from the 
"     'So the minstrels say,' said Jomer. "
"Carolan Lassetter,4041591746586925,24-07-1976
"
"fear we must leave the River now, and make  for the  portage-way  as best we "
"piers and jagged pinnacles of stone on either side, between which were great "
"Rafaelia Delve,4439074336811474,04-12-1993
"
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning  steadily. The Elves sat 
about its feet. 
"The arrow swift, the Gate is strong; "
"You'll be wanting supper, I don't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!' "
need! Are there not evil things enough abroad without seeking them under the 
"Nancie Weafer,4756564593225124,23-06-2000
"
"     'Well, I  like that!' said Pippin. 'Thief indeed! What of our claim for  "
"examined the ground, going backwards and forwards on foot. "
"     'He will,' said Gandalf. 'He knows it and loves it.' "
"Rudolph Rooke,4883409907693,28-08-1993
"
"####-Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his beloved face. One "
"high beneath a  dome of stars,  or from shores of silver far away  washed by "
"     'Still  we  shall  have to  try,'  said  Frodo.  'It's  no worse than I "
since early morning. Yet I wish  to  see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he  
"     'Awake, Jowyn, Lady of  Rohan!'  said  Aragor n again,  and he  took her "
gave a cr y of surprise. 
knowing. Ah! I wonder. Aragorn? His time  draws  near. And he  is strong and 
"tall man with a fair and  noble face,  dark-haired and  grey-eyed, proud and "
"drink  down my throat. My head grew clear, but I was  aching and weary. They "
"####-approached, and the eyes began to quail. One by one they all went dark; they "
window-slit was high and dark. Something  was lying on the floor by the wall 
Great River  on  the edge of  Wilderland  a  clever -handed  and quiet-footed 
"ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo,  who was  not walking, had "
light. 'What have you got there?' Frodo cried. 'Can it be - ? ' 
not wait. Take command in the Lord's absence!' 
I've come.' 
"####-     'The fifth of March  in the Shire-reckoning,' said Aragorn. Pippin made "
"scared, if that is possible.' "
"eh?' he  said, eyeing Sam  closely, but with a smile flickering on his face. "
milk.  'Why did you bring me here?' he said. 
"     `Perilous indeed,' said Aragorn, 'fair and perilous; but only evil need "
####-the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night. 
""
were wrought of crystals;  and white  banners  broke and  fluttered from the 
"Nady Morter,4065134999948921,19-06-2000
"
"concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom "
"     'No,' said Frodo. "
####-     There was no  sign of  him at  the mouth  of their shelter nor  in  the 
"was  not  very  often,  he  did  no  good.  He  did  not  wish  to  desert  the  dwarves, and "
readers. I think that many confuse 'applicability' with 'allegory'; but  the 
all the enemies of Mordor should have a witness. 
"as ever be could, so that Gollum had to get back into his boat and think. "
"and explain  why  you  never sent it.  That's  what you came  to tell  me, I "
of  a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should  possess  (apparently)  
the  singing  of  old  songs  by  the  lake  died  away  to  a  plodding  gloom.  They  knew 
"down the path from the inner gate, and he  can  move like a wind when  he is "
"     But he did say much on  his  own account. Things were far from well, he "
"right: maybe it is fading;  not growing. Land of the Valley of Singing Gold, "
      
     `What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?' 
'and then  use the  gift to  help  your  work  and  better  it. And  use  it 
"pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom. "
"whining, and he spoke to his companions direct, not to his precious self. He "
are?' 
for its  pattern to be comprehended;  it  became part of  the throbbing  air 
silver  and  black with long swords drawn.  Before the barrier stood Faramir  
Frodo was asleep Sam bent over him and listened to his breathing and scanned 
"Adamo Scole,4041593186666324,07-12-2001
"
seemed to have fallen on the Company. 
though  I don't know why.  I never really expected to find  any pipe-weed on 
"     'It is hot in  here,'  said Legolas  to Gandalf. 'I feel  a great wrath "
the  things  that they had chosen to cast away. He was  not willing to leave 
"trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?' "
"is  now snow-clad,  our path, as  we came up, turned about that shoulder  of "
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by 
"Arther Durston,4346308787913,15-07-1982
"
climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked 
"a sea -bird, for it was the emblem of kings  who came over the Sea; and seven "
"     'Three  and two,' said  Butterbur,  referring to the big  folk  and the "
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black  
""
closed his right hand tight upon it. 
"if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the "
"     We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door! "
his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the  Dark Tower 
"began to close in again,  just where they had appeared from a distance to be "
He went on. 
Gandalf has  told you. We know  a good deal about the Ring. We  are horribly 
"remark,  just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after  you, so I  let "
     'But where shall I find courage?' asked Frodo. 'That is what I  chiefly 
"easy as it sounded, and the attempt to stick one or prod one asleep was more likely "
"the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic  ones that he "
is useless  to sit  here until the  snow goes  over  our heads.  We must  do 
"     'I do not wish to go to Moria,' said Legolas.  "
     'It is told  that she had a house built in the branches  of a tree that 
"them a great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you  "
"Gerard MacCorkell,4606541922126,24-06-1978
"
mantle of Aragorn  was turned  to a flame. Then Aragorn took the green stone 
"     `We should be glad to see the Sun;' said Frodo, `but we will stay here: "
 
"     'And I heard she pushed him in, and  he pulled her in after him,'  said "
swayed as he sang. 
"which they could escape at times to hunt, or to ride and run over the open lands by "
"Randie Matveiko,4821058842651033,04-05-1998
"
"'Perhaps I know  more about these pursuers than you  do.  You fear them, but "
"Gelin with three hundreds  of gallant green-clad men. And last and proudest,  "
"ripeness, yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years, "
     'Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had evidently 
business  was with Orcs I think.  They  were  far  down  the valley  in  the 
"night was  blowing  now keenly from  the North, and it was  rising; but  the "
     'Then leave him!' said Gandalf.  
"     'There!' said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and "
Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end. 
"he said. 'Do  me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you  are "
"rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter. "
afraid.' 
at once. 
this Fangorn: and  we  were  warned  against  it. I  wish the chase had  led 
piece of misery is.' 
     Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and on he led 
"Milli Stubbert,4041379306255192,24-02-1979
"
the while Gollum's other hand was tightening on Sam's throat. 
what was happening. 
winding  deviously up towards the city's gate: a black  mouth opening in the 
"####-until he  came to the edge  of the knoll. There, choosing a gap  between the "
me your bow.' 
"of the others. It is  no small  feat to have come so far,  and  through such "
"     'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies,  if that can be  managed. "
"that it  should fall here, at the very  door  of Bag End! Among all my hopes "
 
"Maynard Medendorp,4017951615657,22-06-2000
"
carefully.' 
at the same time insatiable desire. 
"rushing, fuming on  the  stones,  down to Edoras and the green hills and the "
""
"out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and  the  one "
""
""
Fangorn be troubled on my account!' 
all the Company is true.' 
themselves again in a dark hollow under an overhanging stone. 
Thorin  and  his  company;  boats  and  rowers were  put  at  their  service;  and  crowds 
"     Elrond laughed. `He  shall  be found,' he  said. `Then you two shall go "
"could catch sudden  glimpses of rolling meads, and far  beyond them hills in "
"slow in the  drawing,  tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!' Now his "
     'Trust me to arrange things  better than that!'  said Merry.  'We can't 
"to  the  rock-face  and  stare  away west  through  the opening, over  the cliff, over  the "
"He would not  forget or  forgive  the  theft, not  if a  thousand years turned him to "
"on the tops  of  outlying hills along both border s  of the great  range, and "
behind them stood the  high place  where  they had  breakfasted.  Frodo half 
     The  ferry-boat moved slowly  across the water. The Buckland shore drew 
Elrond  knew  all  about  runes  of  every  kind. That  day  he  looked  at  the  swords 
grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness? ' 
"laughter of fair voices not of goblins, and the singing was beautiful, but it sounded "
"     'The Sun may  shine here,' said Gimli, 'but  there are memories of that "
this feeling  of insecurity grew  on  all the Company. For  a whole day they 
     Slowly the eyes crept nearer. 
let's  worry about it now-let 's have some real News! Tell  me all about  the 
eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them in 
"Perhaps Gorbag, who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would come out, and "
strange to me that  the healing hand should  also wield the sword. It is not 
sign that Gandalf was here on  October the third: that is three days ago now. 
of stone  so  strong and  old that  it seemed to have been  not builded  but 
"the  agony of  Gollum's  shrivelled  mind and body,  enslaved to tha t  Ring, "
""
""
"topmost tower of Barad-dyr. One moment  only it stared out, but as from some "
"can get over that withou t being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of "
he said; 'nor is aught that goes on two legs.' 
"Latisha Janusz,4041593057789,12-03-1981
"
"Haley de Grey,4041374076720079,13-04-1990
"
"     'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn. "
"to  fetch Orcs,  or  any servants of the  Enemy.  Why wait till now,  and go "
"he himself was  weeping as  he ran. Doom, doom,  doom the  drum-beats rolled "
"     They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before "
"kill them  now? They're  a cursed  nuisance, and we're in a hurry. Evening's "
"""Yes, yes, but  that was  long ago,"" said Gloin. ""I was  talking about you. And I "
     'Good heavens!' said Pippin. 'At breakfast?' He walked away towards the 
"""It may  have  been  secret  once,""  said  Thorin,  ""but  how  do  we  know  that  it  is "
the meantime I will tell something of events. The Eagles had long had suspicion of 
"your pack has not been found, then you must send for the herb-master of this "
####-inimitable by bigger and clumsier races.  
"Now  he  drew  it  out.  It  shone  pale  and  dim  before  his  eyes.  ""So  it  is  an  elvish "
fell upon him as he came to the king's side and stood there in silence. 
which way the Hedge lies!' 
"damage one of my pans, or I'll carve you into mincemeat.' "
"Melissa Noury,4041592768555202,03-09-1980
"
     `And even in  these la tter days dwelling in the trees might  be thought 
"a  shout  he sprang across  the grass and  came into the street, followed by "
"but he did not speak of it for  a long time. Four  days passed,  without the "
"####-the gully.  It was not much more than a  tall man's  height now,  and at its "
"silent, wondering what would chance,  for their  eyes were on the trees  and "
can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold out long.' 
And even now the  wind of thy  hope cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a  fleet 
"     The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might be an easy  "
"He  did  not  expect  a  chorus  of  volunteers, so he was not disappointed. Fili and "
"Hilliard Spir,4299649136293236,19-08-1976
"
"get  into  boats  for  all  he  cared.  There  he  could  have  fine  sport  hunting  them,  or "
across  his lap  they laid the  cloven horn and  the hilts and shards of his 
"Kaiser Pybus,4041590901249725,18-02-1990
"
"Elsy Saltwell,4041590588679,09-05-2000
"
"from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him. Hasufel and Arod, "
"that gives us man's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here, "
"the plain,  and above them was  reared half as  high again its  tall central "
"door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it  opens inwards. We must  "
"moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.' "
"Yehudit Hicken,4017958868648,18-02-1979
"
"     But when  Aragorn arose  all that beheld him  gazed in  silence, for it "
"Eddy Bernadot,4017955306188,07-12-1987
"
"     'Yes, I knew,'  said the wizard.  'I bent  my thought upon him, bidding "
"""Then  the  prophecies  of  the  old  songs  have  turned  out  to  be  true,  after  a "
 
"was  cool and  fragrant, the riders came down the North-way to the gates  of "
"Abey Berringer,4006314734586,07-11-1976
"
"ominous, a dull  bleared  disc of red; but all Mordor lay about the Mountain  "
protection shall be under my protection  and under the shield of Gondor. Are 
strength of the defence and to  keep the men  of Gondor busy in many places.  
sends  to darken hearts and counsel. And so it doth indeed. I wish the  Lord 
"him; then he drew his sword.  No doubt he meant to kill his captives, rather  "
"But Bilbo was  not  quite  so  unlearned  in  dragon-lore as all  that, and  if Smaug "
cave. 
"####-Ho, ho! my lad! "
"proud  of,  and  most  fond  of  recalling  long  afterwards,  although  he  was  quite "
"He threatens the Men of  Rohan and draws  off their help from Minas  Tirith, "
Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was 
"'and  if all our hopes do not perish, then in time I will send Gimli Gluin's "
its icy springs.' 
"comfortable as they  could. It was a bare and ugly place, with a mean little "
"son would go with you gladly. A good lad, I may say. If that pleases you, go "
and Gloin were sent back  to  their bundles  at the top of the tunnel. After a while a 
"merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of  the River.' Then lightly she passed them "
"when  they had passed from the  Shire,  going about the  south skirts of the "
"     From Frodo's mind the bright morning - treacherously bright, he thought  "
"suspected him more  deeply than ever,  and if possible liked the new Gollum, "
"ate a  very  frugal supper (for hobbits), and  then went on again. Soon they "
them! There is  another talan in  the next tree.  There the others must take 
"dark  lands opening wide underneath him,  touched here and there with the light of "
"Guy Bichener,4017955278080,23-05-1999
"
half-trolls with white eyes and red tongues. Some now hastened up behind the 
"of the world.  We should seek a final  end of this menace, even if we do not "
the Old Took died. 
is  a  thousand  to one you will never  find  it  again  and never get out of Mirkwood; 
     A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before 
"Captain were bent wholly on the falling city, and   as yet no tidings came to "
"seeing them approach, halted under the  shadow of  the  rock and  waited for  "
game  he  had  ever  played  with  other  funny  creatures  sitting  in  their  holes  in  the 
so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.' 
"Hewet Head,4017957566446427,16-03-1998
"
narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin felt lonely 
"already it looked less dejected,  as  if  it approved of the  change in  its "
"is the hour,' said  the old  man, 'and  at such times you are  wont to come, "
"Otha Klasing,4041373766784049,19-04-1991
"
""
     When this was  done  they turned to watch Gandalf. He  appeared to have 
"     'That was but a trial,' said Faramir. 'Today we may make  the Enemy pay "
"confessed, by Gollum's talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call "
"     'Yes, I can smell  it,'  said Frodo, but he did not move,  and his eyes "
"diminish to  ordinary  hobbit-size. He was  riding a pony, and a  scarf  was "
"Orville Smythe,4017953305687,13-03-1975
"
"####-Thjoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once "
"horror faded  out of their  hearts as they looked at him, and saw the  merry "
"thoughts of his sword and the rope that sprang to his mind, and went and sat "
"roads, likely and  unlikely. In  that case to enter  Moria would  be to walk  "
sickness and great hunger.  
"fight,' said Gimli; 'for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.' "
"thought Bilbo,  not  knowing  that  even  the  big  ones,  the  ores  of  the mountains,  go "
####-bracken were invading the beds down near the bottom hedge. 
I wish I had  time  to  tell you even a few of  the  tales or one or  two of  the songs 
"sitting in  a  chair before  a small  bright fire. He looked  very old,  but "
"Nadiya Dunbabin,4017952484050575,08-01-2000
"
"in the Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would  die "
an argument with himself. 
"     'You may make a fire,  if you can,' answered Gandalf. 'If there are any "
"side,  and  flapped  back  to  his  boat,  and  went  off  into  the  dark.  Bilbo  thought  he "
ever there could be! ' 
many of them? ' 
""
####-house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall 
"     `Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ' he said. "
"about the dwarves. Bilbo wished he had never heard them, or at least that he could "
"therefore, he said farewell  to Elrond, and giving him such small gifts as he would "
beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been 
"by side, and covered them with one covering, and stood then with bowed heads "
"the  valiant archers of Morthond. The flying rain had ceased for a time, and "
"wall  of  the  Isenmouthe,  no  more   than   a   furlong   away  northward. "
"the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was "
"turf, silent  except for the whisper of the air over the edges  of the land, "
"pipe-weed  in his gardens, about  the year  1070 according to our reckoning.  "
     What a joy to meet! 
     'Elves and Dragons' I says  to him. 'Cabbages and  potatoes are  better 
"lain, and passed on to  a long green  lawn, glowing in sunshine, bordered by "
went  wandering  off  in  various  directions;  some  were  exercising  the  ponies  down 
"light;  but  it  looks  to me  as  if  it was  just  drawn  up  on  the  bank, which  is  low  just "
before the door. 'Stay this madness!' 
"stealth  along the  lane.  Outside  the gate  they stopped, and three  black  "
eyes shining as red and fierce as the flames. 
"again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the "
"evening,  their  ponies were  tired,  especially  the  one  that  carried  the  baggage;  and "
"     Never lie on the ground, "
"in a contest of words,' said he. 'Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set "
"themselves in a rock -chamber, wide and rough, with an  uneven stooping roof.  "
"shades  amid which it  stood,  the  cruel pinnacles  and  iron  crown of the "
or cut them down. 
"then a  marching  music began like solemn drums, and above the rolling beats "
fours and  crawling  up the bank  of the pit. 'Nice hobbits! Nice Sam! '  he 
"Melly Milberry,4204431225563231,08-12-1991
"
"     Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water: "
hollowed back into a  shallow bay with an arched roof: the only roof of  the 
"This is what happened, as far  as I can gather. The Riders made straight for  "
before we get home.' 
     Frodo looked  round.  It did  look like home. Many of his own favourite 
     'And here is  the knife that cut them!' said Gimli. He stooped and drew 
stone. After  several turns  they came to a house close to the wall  of  the 
"Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!' "
"     And the Tree that was withered shall be renewed, "
"Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They "
"torches, winking away below there as they  issued  from the tunnel. At  last  "
"the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of "
"     Mist and twilight, cloud and shade, "
"""Dwalin and Balin here already, I see,"" said Kili. ""Let us join the throng!"" "
from 
"hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its "
"Netty Dake,4017950188003,25-02-1984
"
"Trip Friel,4041596435669,23-12-1981
"
"about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the  Bag End'. But "
"Shannon McOwen,4041592401746853,20-01-1975
"
really you speaking until near the end.' 
"Stevena Childes,4041371391302880,06-09-1985
"
"""That's  better!""  said  Smaug.  ""But  don't  let  your  imagination  run  away  with "
"away from the main range, stood the old castle  of Durthang, now one of  the "
""
"that he  has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it  has been good  "
"He's  as wise as any,  but he's soft -hearted, that's what he is. It's beyond "
     'Stand! stand! ' he cried desperately. `Running is no use.' 
"all again, wherever they be,  even the Three, and  all that has been wrought "
"     Not until they had  dwindled into the distance, north and west, and the "
     O! Water cold we may pour at need 
"Lyndsay Dayment,4041372962464,01-03-1976
"
"louder, doom, doom. "
here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for a moment.' 
"trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend "
"held  up a small  pipe with a wide  flattened bowl, and handed it to  Gimli. "
"     So he thought in an inner chamber of  his cunning, which he still hoped "
"     'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?' asked Merry. "
"""Never  heard  of  him,""  growled  the  man,  ""And  what's  this  little  fellow?""  he "
"     'Go!'  said Merry. 'If you trouble this  village again, you will regret "
as  of  dogs  baying  far  off.  Then  they  all  fell  silent;  and  as  they  sat  it  seemed  they 
"said Gandalf, as these two now appeared and stood smiling and bowing. "
and  he  sat  down  and  told  them  everything-except  about  the  finding  of  the  ring 
"Neils Millichap,4380072929759091,13-03-1993
"
the mantled shoulders vast and dark. From a mouth unseen there came a deadly 
It  seemed unfair  to have put his friends  to  all  this  trouble;  and  he 
Isengard. From the  havens of Harad ships of war  put out to sea; and out of 
     A head  appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. Frodo sat up in  
I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I liked the sound of him. He seemed 
"must,' he said.  'This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at "
it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands  of the Enemy:  
"Job Duigan,4041376930020,03-08-1988
"
"Zorah O'Donnelly,4017957288538212,18-07-2001
"
     Each of the hobbits  saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted 
"     'Well, here is  the strangest riddle that we have yet found!' exclaimed "
"dwell  there,  workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with  great  store of "
"Rivi Jedrzaszkiewicz,4017954562922,30-11-2000
"
""
"""Quicker, quicker!"" said the voice. ""The torches will soon be relit."" "
remote 
"suddenly he struck his toes on a snag in the floor, and fell flat with his little sword "
behind where there  was a black brink  and an  empty  fall into nothingness.  
Last Homely House twinkling below them they strode away far into the night. 
"going  from  bad  to  worse.  There  was  a  most  specially  greedy,  strong  and  wicked "
     The  others looked  at him. A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell 
"     'Will you be wanting anything  to drink, masters?' he asked. 'And shall "
"night,  not  if  the  whole  cavalcade  had  passed  two  feet  off.  As  for  Bilbo  walking "
"and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and "
"the way."" "
     Beneath  the  mountain's  arm within  the  Wizard's Vale through  years 
""
down at the others laughing and talking. 
"came  many  of  the  Lake-men,  for Bard  could  not  restrain  them;  and out upon  the "
about them as they came down from  the  walls  and went hand in hand  to the 
under them. Between the  Dike and the eaves of that  nameless wood only  two 
"     'Now  you go to  sleep first, Mr. Frodo,' he said.  'It's getting  dark "
"it was morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing  "
gather all the strength that we can find.' 
""
"Paula Dunford,4041597848864607,21-11-1985
"
"Elaine Shiels,4017953616166,26-02-2000
"
Imladris  himself before the  whole Council. On that errand I came into this 
be tended with care for many days. 
bottom  went the bed  of a now dry  and  withered stream.  Beyond  its stony 
"Viole Cotta,4278278590128,11-07-1991
"
in Helm's Deep!' 
watch. 
our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.' 
to  rouse them; and they speak  only in whispers. But  some  of my trees are 
"What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your "
     In the days  that  followed his crowning  the King sat on his throne in 
"studs  in  the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their realm, and there the "
kill me too. Trust Master! ' 
the brooding East. 
"and  they  were  high  up  in  the  sky,  rising  all  the  time  in  strong  sweeping circles. "
"he  knew,  for  he  had  been  in  it,  and  had  himself  told much  of  it  to  the  wizard  on "
lock  nor  bar  may  hinder  the  homecoming  spoken  of  old.  Nor  is  this  town  in  the 
he plunged in. A shadow followed him. 
sullen gloom. Yet it seemed to Frodo that he looked upon a morning of sudden 
""
at a sign from Merry now marched over the bridge. Dashing back into the mill 
"     'He lies nearby  in this  House,  and I will go  to him,' said Gandalf.  "
the  Dike lit with white  light: it  was  boiling  and  crawling  with black  
strangers  in the  watchful  keeping of his  comrades. After  some  time  he 
"####-     `Wait  a moment!  ' cried Aragorn. `We must  divide up into pairs,  and "
"Ward Grolmann,4041376715039043,16-10-1994
"
"     'But that is strange indeed,' said Aragorn. 'Did you search the  slain?  "
"Lorie Potkins,4041375615036,10-10-1990
"
There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine was brought; 
secret  they have long been building  floats and barges in great numbers  in 
"     'The Shire - he may be seeking for  it now, if he has not already found "
"'until you stand once more on the  borders of your land, and dire need is on "
to think how proud he had been yesterday morning of the smoke-rings he had sent 
"have me lie abed seven days yet,'  she said. 'And  my  window does not  look "
"foe. To and fro he swayed, now  so near the brink that almost he tumbled in, "
"     Or music welling underground, "
"Bili Latimer,4017952573715815,22-04-1980
"
"Jada Robertazzi,4979736584674,17-08-1986
"
     Whose shall the horn be? Who shall call them 
"with a tight belt and a light tooth, mind you. We've been a bit free with it "
"     'Tell  me,  lord,' he said,  'what  brings you  here?  And what was the "
certainly  come before the  day was old.  'Seems as if none o' the  ruffians 
"an Orc was carrying them  away. Not  to help  them to escape, we may be sure. "
Legolas running in his mind. 
Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have brought back a gleam  of 
"Bab Slym,4041378996300,15-08-1995
"
pale evening sky pricked by a  few early  stars.  There  was a wide treeless 
"are  so  near  that  he  smelt  them,"" he  thought, ""then  they'll have heard his shrieking "
"Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and the like of him does not walk now "
"Adolf Sieghart,4017954733317,03-06-1986
"
supposed that one at any  rate of his objects  in his  long absence  the day 
joke to refer to it as Sharkey's End. 
"     And saw a crown of stars appear, "
"he was  awake. `It's  sunlight  and bright  day, right enough,'  he said. `I  "
""
"Timmy Brunsdon,4017951332170,14-03-1977
"
"proved  strong enough to bear  many men. Legolas ran  lightly up, and  Frodo "
"Mella Beddoes,4041599322499421,23-03-1977
"
"Latrena Casford,4041591977780,25-04-1976
"
"them:  a parting  present from Nob and  Bob. 'Apples for walking, and a pipe "
"Jacintha Murfin,4573267552794,28-04-2001
"
"alone. But  even as they stood there, and the Elves were  going aboard,  and "
and see if it's still there! ' 
climbing  wood  of  pines  that  here  stood  right  up  the  mountain  slope  from  the 
Dnnen?' 
"Rest a while, and take food, and be ready when I return.' "
"     D®nhere and Djorwine, doughty Grimbold, "
black sky and  the sides of the great mountain  loomed dark against it. They  
biting and kicking and fighting as if they had all gone mad. 
"####-history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and "
"place,  fished out  his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it  when  he "
####-westwards over the lower lands.  Far away in the tumble of country  that lay 
"Lindie Cay,4123379338536818,13-07-1988
"
"would spare his failing years. Yet I  see that I come too late. Others, whom "
friendless  and  alone. Everyone  that  he cared for had  gone away into the 
"####-waste. The marshes were at an end, dying away into dead peats and wide flats "
do our best to help you against the Enemy.' 
"Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old Words and Names  in the  Shire, "
"Karel Glasspool,4017957007775459,04-04-1976
"
"     But  now  Sam  noticed  that the Old  Mill had  vanished,  and  a large "
"said: ""What's all this trouble? Who has been knocking my people about?"" "
already  Mina s Tirith is assailed. I  fear that it  will fall ere we come to 
was smiling and kind. 
remember the Great Danger and so love their beloved land all the  more.  And 
"plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work. "
"and  tied  together  and  floated  back  to  Lake-town,  which  stood  close  to  the  point "
"They  thanked  him,  of  course,  with  many  bows  and  sweepings  of  their  hoods "
"Lin Nornable,4601206400682,11-05-1993
"
"     Sam got up. He was dazed,  and blood streaming from his head dripped in "
"Tootsie Barkaway,4041373248204525,06-02-1980
"
"screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that "
"his own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf "
cheerful garden after the close Forest. 
"cast over the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and bound the end "
"sudden flood.  wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows.  "
and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Ugl®k. I have spoken.' 
gave a swift glance towards the hobbits as he  spoke; but Sam  said nothing.  
have been stolen  and I am  just  a piece of  luggage for the  Orcs.  I hope 
"Tisha Colafate,4948174135992,07-12-1983
"
"     'Here at least you are guarded in the  strongest fastness of the Mark,' "
     In Tauremornaluml. 
"remained  sitting  on  the  ground. He  thought much  but  said  little,  unless  it was  to "
"Faramir would  return. He  would not be dismayed. But now,  who  knows if he "
"""And raspberry jam and apple-tart,"" said Bifur. ""And mince-pies and cheese,"" said "
""
"of breakfast than  because they  felt  hungry), Treebeard stood,  humming in "
"cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running, as if no "
""
"Thorin  pondered  these  words.  ""I  will  keep  this  sword  in  honour,""  he  said. "
eyes though. 
That night Bilbo made up his mind. The sky was black and moonless. As soon 
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little  river of milk and 
     of the Mark-wardens mist-enshrouded; 
"more kindly  of journeying, as it always did at that season. He  had  indeed "
your question at one hearing!' 
####-and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old;  and it is not known 
be  secured  again.  But  among  them  were  several  others  which  had  been  used  for 
"     But Merry stood at the foot of the green mound,  and he wept, and  when "
"Giacopo Gudahy,4041596362794075,05-02-1999
"
"     'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo,  'what's wrong with the old customs? Choose a  "
"     When they were some  fifty paces off,  Jomer  cried  in  a  loud voice: "
"set  with  blue  stones,  many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue "
"stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his  own ground. He thinks less "
"     'Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper, I'll "
"comes of the Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.' "
"range there was tumbled an ever  wider land of bleak hills, and deep valleys "
enjoyed this pan of the journey better than any up to that time. The sun was 
Tonight  the  Lord  of  the  Eagles  was  filled  with  curiosity  to  know  what  was 
"Torin Eadington,4041595764879294,29-03-1980
"
"often with  you.  We can usually guess what you are thinking. I  knew Bilbo,  "
"Marsha Nail,4041599814305516,23-05-1995
"
""
"     'Look  out!' cried Sam. 'He'll spring!' He stepped forward, brandishing "
"if we decide to part company, I can  set you down outside my  country at any "
"     'That  will soon  be seen,' said Elrohir. 'But let us speak  no more of "
"here, as  the  messengers of  Mordor fly. Shadowfax must run  a longer road.  "
"####-an  arc of  fire,  above the margin of the world. Then with a great  cry the "
"and men fled  before his face, and  they were caught between the  hammer and "
"     `Yes, yes,  master!  '  said Gollum. `Dreadful  danger! Smjagol's bones "
"napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quick. Not but what it would be "
"to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads "
"the last time, not yet. Good-bye!' "
not think you need me any more: were  I to let you fall you would float upon  
"the  sound was like music,  or  like  water in  a  parched land; and  as  he "
weariness to will and limb. 
"Fabien Surgey,4041371181780220,26-03-1998
"
     The  day passed uneasily. They lay deep  in the heather and counted out 
"hall; ""but what is left is out on the veranda. We have been about looking for Beorn "
fish had disturbed the still surface of  the water. Turning quickly they saw 
"Gandalf takes them  on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras "
Alas  for  the wailing of the  gulls! Did  not the Lady tell me to beware of 
"cave. Two or three  torches  had been lit. Men were stirring. Sam was there,  "
horsemen sweeping over  the bridge  and  the rattle  of orc-feet  running up 
"stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that  he was in "
saved  myself.' The chances were that  he and Merry wou ld be killed together 
yourself.' Pippin said no more. 
Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will send our  messages 
poor Merry. It was quite useless.  
"     'You'll live to regret  it, young  fellow! Why  didn't you  go too? You  "
"known, though doubtless Mr. Baggins remained a bit of a mystery. In any case the "
""
"Fabio Thomsson,4041377464953,15-08-1987
"
snow. So  it was  when you  rode  to war. But  a  west  wind has shaken  the  
crying to Snowmane he  charged headlong to greet him. Great was the clash of 
"welcomed; and when they sat all  at table in Merethrond,  the  Great Hall of "
"before Midsummer, and that is now  here. Even if you set out from this spot, "
"be whispered in secret-: it was said that we were hemmed in  a narrow place, "
The mountain throne once more is freed! 
"fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both  his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was "
without 
"     `Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,' said "
"upon them and made all  their harness to gleam like red gold,  and the white "
"saw,  too,  that  there  were  spiders  huge  and  horrible  sitting  in  the  branches  above "
spearmen  leapt  down  and  charged.  The  yells  were  deafening.  The  rocks  were 
"Another  swoop and another, and another house and  then another  sprang afire and "
"somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of "
"and seek for  Imladris; but since the  way was full  of doubt and  danger, I "
matter of fact he was dreaming of eggs and bacon. 
commands the men of Gondor. But  the Lord Faramir is by right the Steward of 
"time that  is given, us. And already, Frodo,  our  time is beginning to look  "
like that better. And of us three Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for  
"     Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left him, but "
"you  going to get  through  this?'  asked Fredegar. 'Follow me!' said Merry, "
     and the Sun'll be rising soon!'  
""
blessedness.  
"great horn, and his yellow hair was flying in the wind. The horse's head was "
"""I  am  going  to  disappear,""  he  said.  ""I  shall  draw  the  spiders  off,  if  I  can;  and "
"that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will "
"your  finger,  you  were  invisible;  only  in  the  full  sunlight  could  you  be  seen,  and "
And he set watchmen upon the walls.  
"entrances  they saw, dark black  arches: one straight before them eastwards,  "
"     'It  has  been  guessed  already,' said  Ingold;  'for there have  been "
mountain-tops.  
"understand  at  all  (though  I  expect  you  do,  since  you  know  all  about  Bilbo's "
seventh day. 
danger has passed. It hasn't. Make haste!  ' 
"splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury  of the "
"Marsha McArdell,4062742964857,25-10-1986
"
"     'How do we shape our course now, Smjagol? ' asked Frodo. 'Must we cross "
"Carlita Banane,4134929649751501,27-06-1985
"
"     'Well?' said Strider, when he rea ppeared.  'Why did you do that?  Worse "
"his throes, he wavered. "
""
     A wanderer escaped from night 
north.  Out  of the east  the  biting wind was blowing. To his  right  there 
are not  thinking what  you  are saying:  condemned  to  go on this hopeless 
"Christie Whissell,4017950242776,18-12-1977
"
"up into the sky through floating clouds: Caradhras, Celebdil, and Fanuidhol.  "
"Miranda Borg,4802529082423393,16-09-1998
"
"blue.  As their  eyes changed, the travellers  perceived  that the floor was "
no 
"the  breeze,  and there a white  tree flowered upon a sable  field beneath a  "
"shall soon before the break of day start on our long journey, a journey from which "
Saruman  kept enough wisdom not  to  trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his 
set  against  the  Nine Riders  that are  evil. With you and  your  faithful 
"Yale Lowe,4041373747598880,09-07-1992
"
"     Then she stared at him as one that is stricken,  and her face blanched, "
"leagues away, the Dawn came,  red as flame.  Loud rang the hunting-horns  to "
"     'I  received you for your safe-keeping,' answered Thjoden; 'and also to "
"     About  the eleventh hour, released  at  last for  a while from service. "
     Several Ents had already arrived.  More were coming  in down the  other  
"grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches  of trees "
"     'Silence!' said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back;  but the Messenger  "
Chapter 5. The White Rider 
     The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled  into a  
"that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair without me. I "
""
""
"looked at their faces  and  nodded his head, as though  in sign  that he had "
     `Yes! We wants it! We wants it! ' 
"####-Middle-earth.  Then he  threw  his  staff  on the  ground, and  sat down  in "
"Eleonore MacGillivray,4293220047426897,26-01-1997
"
themselves  be seen passing out of the door  like shadows and down  the stony 
"     'Do you  remember that  bit  of  rabbit, Mr. Frodo?' he  said. 'And our "
"     'Here  then  at last comes the ending of the Fellowship  of  the Ring,' "
"the  Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased  to  remember  "
which  you  may  remember.  The  water  was  swollen  both  with  the  melting  of  the 
really  handsomely  for  his  services;  they  had  brought  him  to  do  a  nasty  job  for 
"     'O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar, "
"in your keeping, we are told.' "
"Kettie Antham,4017954198131881,17-12-1998
"
"over the valley of Dale, turned from the Mountain on its road to the Lake, flowing "
"     He quickened his pace, and they  followed him wearily.  Soon they began "
"Gollum thought it was a riddle, and he was frightfully upset. "
"     When  he thought  all  was ready he lifted the pans off  the  fire, and "
"Augie Yve,4017956022417360,30-09-1990
"
"     'The victor would emerge  stronger  than either, and  free from doubt,' "
"about."" "
"few words of it are now, as a rule, remember ed. "
one must tread the path that need chooses!' 
go that way.' 
     that I shall ever see. 
in the woodland under leaves of gold!  ' 
"The dwarves of yore made mighty spells, "
"through a cleft  between two jagged  stones. The light was no longer bright, "
Where now was the  Ring-bearer? How thin  indeed was  the thread  upon 
him to slide out of it. And after all that last question had not been a genuine riddle 
"spring  water and  had no taste, and it did not feel either  cool or warm in "
"our  dream, he could have  made them clear to  us without need of messenger. "
     A mist gathered about  them. Above  them a  few stars  still  glimmered 
their outward  course  must have lain nearer  the river. But  this  eastward 
robe and had wrapped  it about her;  and he thought that  she looked fair and  
"that they did little but  eat and drink and  rest, and walk among the trees;  "
"filled with a  red wrath  and shouted aloud, and  displaying  his  standard, "
"Sib Grzegorecki,4017953442772193,25-03-1992
"
"either  under  The  Hill  or  over  The  Hill  or  across  The  Water,  and  there  they "
There was no sign of their horses to be seen. 
"Abramo Bulgen,4041377677380,25-03-1990
"
they turned the whole place upside-down. 
the  period.  On  Thror's  Map  is  written  Here  of  old  was  Thrain  King  under  the 
"a horn, and cried  aloud for  the onset. Over the field rang his clear voice "
"they'll  take  it,  steal my Precious. Thieves.  We  hates them. Fissh, nice "
""
"####-hide of close-fitting grey and br own. Their limbs were long, and their hands "
"Gracie Ingledew,4680338291987,03-11-1992
"
before your time. Leave us now and take your fish! ' 
"     'You're  br eaking  arrest,  that's what you're doing,'  said the leader  "
had gone past my gate without my seeing you.' 
####-hanging growths perhaps:  they could not tell what  they were. And still the 
"Thaddus Kenwyn,4041379668882,28-04-1981
"
"     'They rested here a  while,' he said,  'but even the outward  trail  is "
     On  the flat under -side Frodo saw  some scratches: 'There seems to he a  
"red,  another  in  green.  They  burst  on  the  ground  in  the  middle  of  the  circle  and "
sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over. 
"seemed still and tense about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet, "
"kissed her hand, and sprang into the saddle, and rode away, and did not look  "
"the  journeys  they should  make  and the  roads they should choose, Imrahil  "
"Nanete Clethro,4041372887536452,01-11-1991
"
"somehow, if you understand.' "
"new strength grew in him, he raised his  head, and then with a  great effort "
"forward into the gloom. Clip-clop, clip-clop came the approaching rider. The "
"Mickie Nel,4997904374181,26-08-1987
"
"The light from the door, almost closed, soon faded as he went down. So silent was "
"     'The Wood-elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trail "
"     'It is  not  wizardry, but a power far older,' said  Gandalf:  'a power  "
"     He stepped down and  vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and "
of Elrond. All the road  was lined with people to do them  honour and praise 
"     He could not sleep and he held a  debate with himself. 'Well, come now,  "
"Delmar Risborough,4402478771909243,30-07-1981
"
"labour to  repair  Isildur's fault, I went  with  Gandalf  on  the  long and "
 
"Phebe Thornewell,4514359653619305,04-03-1989
"
"remained fair and the wind held in the west, but nothing could waft away the "
####-     `I saw you!' cried Frodo. `You were walking backwards and forwards. The 
cried out and struggled wildly. 
"were among the  siege-engines, hewing, slaying, driving their foes into  the "
"compelling  desire for cool water.  'Wait for me,  Sam,' he  stammered.  'Must  "
"to the Hallows and they came  to the tombs in Rath Dnnen, and they bore away "
"Bronson Formby,4041596344051,27-02-1979
"
"     'I would have  you  command this  Warden, and bid him  let me go,'  she "
hobbits  it  is  a supper -song  or a bed-song;  but these  hobbits  hummed a  
But  they  found  that  the  upper  end  of  the  tunnel  had  been  shattered  and  blocked 
"us in. No, we have got to do something at once.' "
follow me;  but plainly he  did  not do so. He guessed his master s mind and  
"That  is why, when  the  elves bound  the dwarves  in  a  long  line, one behind  the "
     'Then you haven't  seen him?' said  the  farmer. 'H e  went up the  lane 
"north,  and  there will  be comings and  goings, and the evil things will be "
"     'And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess,' said "
"Nicol Batecok,4095720998612,27-11-1994
"
"weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs.  Frodo's "
"     'I am  healed,' she said,  'healed at  least in body, save  my left arm "
"Kenton Drinnan,4017951342310,09-05-1986
"
"beside, and many hours it  seemed since the king rode to his fall, though in "
"frightful mask, more like a skull than a living head,  and in the sockets of "
"     'I've come  to bid  you  good night,' said  the  landlord,  putting the "
Soon afterwards  the other dwarves were brought  into  the  town amid scenes of 
     The elven-ship in haven grey 
As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and  saw the  lamps  
the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Ber®thiel.' 
     So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the  City. 
"North, and with them Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves.  "
"whether Thorin would now listen to another embassy, since new tidings had come "
"""I will look after that. I am not sending the horse back, I am riding it!"" "
with his dripping and ragged clothes clinging to him cold and clammy.  
of  men  broke  out. Flaming  brands  appeared over  the brink and clustered 
"Faith Sarre,4017956376059024,31-08-2000
"
"His sight is keen, but he cannot see all  that passes under hill  and  tree. "
"ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the full  tale to none, "
and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were 
"must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard "
"was  filled  with the  light upon the elf-faces, and the  sound of voices so "
     'D'you mean to say you've been through this hole?' said Sam. `Phew! But 
"for advice is a  dangerous gift,  even from  the  wise to the wise, and  all "
good!' he thought. He drew his sword and tightened his belt. 
"Devan Ambrogioli,4041598847509011,30-04-1975
"
"Down, down they went in a long winding file. When  at last they came  to the "
shoot without  arguing.  There's  got to  be  some  fighting  before this is 
"""At your service!"" said Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur standing in a row. Then they "
"yer  nassty  little  rabbit,""  said  he  looking  at  the  hobbit's  furry  feet;  and  he  picked "
"     'It's no  good arguing about it any more,' said Merry.  'We have  still "
"Marie-ann Thake,4041377979166,17-09-1993
"
"had  been  Thorin  who  stepped  forward,  and  as  the  lights  went  out  he  fell  like  a "
"the years  in  which  he tormented  us  have passed,  we shall  not  tire of "
"     `No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? ' said Gollum. "
"come trotting  in, and  he was now  trying  to listen to several conflicting "
"weary, of course; so we are, my precious, all of us. But we must take master  "
"     ""Thus spoke  Malbeth the  Seer,  in the days of  Arvedui,  last king at "
"it,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  another.  No  going  upstairs  for  the  hobbit: "
"wished to talk to everything, the old Elves did. But then the Great Darkness "
"Ardys Verlinden,4041597199777,27-04-1977
"
"     'All  in good time,' said Legolas. 'We were the hunters, and you should "
note on the shire records  
"off in black and white, its topmost tower like a glittering needle: and then "
cloaks. 
     and swaying beeches bear 
she called to each in turn. 
"seen  a  sight  that  made  his  heart  leap,  dark  shapes  small  yet  majestic  against  the "
"others we miss more, but  there's no  denying she  showed  more  spirit than "
####- 
"their eyes, and  then suddenly  sprang up. They  looked  about in amazement, "
     'Tell us now the full tale! ' said Celeborn: 
the beast; but for Snowmane  they dug a grave and set up a stone  upon which 
"rock at the  foot of the cliff  behind. Immediately, as  if a spell had been "
leaping from the firmament sears  the  dark  air with  intolerable light. No 
"     'But first I will  plead this excuse,' said Jomer. 'Had  I seen  her in "
     The  Elves sat on  the grass  and spoke  together in  soft voices; they 
"flame  of the tor ches; but  if the company halted, there  seemed  an endless "
"burning mountain  far away. A  fresh turmoil was surging in its  deep wells,  "
"     'Where  does  that other old  animal, that  Fatty  Lumpkin, come from?' "
when harsh and loud they heard orc-voices. Quickly  they  slunk out of sight 
"     'I will  come,' said Gimli. 'I wish to see him and  learn  if he really "
climbed down they found the  hollow  filled  with  thick bushes  and  matted 
"foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead.' "
"a dark line hung, like distant mountains  of motionless smoke. Every now and "
####-now.' 
"they may lead,' said Gimli. "
     'Do Elves live in those woods?' he asked. 
"Berrie Lait,4017958553349947,12-02-1991
"
"Irvin Meany,4041370817795107,08-05-1986
"
Gluin's son would have been  the first to run to the gleam of gold.  But not 
Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.' 
 
who  had  made  his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound  inward 
saw  upon  the doors. Bilbo had a  corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave 
"troop-leaders could  guide  themselves  in black night or  fog,  and it  was "
always kept it on its chain.' 
"Ardella Valasek,4269260478596,26-03-1976
"
"     Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away; and "
"Carena Cantua,4041595653676,21-12-1981
"
"haste,' he said. 'My  company chafes to be away, and every hour lessens your "
Chapter 4. The Field of Cormallen 
"night, and so  time our going that we come upon the fields  when tomorrow is "
"long sword,  in fashion like And®ril but of less  lineage and he bore also a  "
"there was once a bridge, leading to steep stairs that climbed up the right bank, and "
luxurious  hobbit-hole  for  her  (and  partly  with  her  money)  that  was  to  be  found 
"     But Jowyn stood still as  a figure carven in stone,  her hands clenched "
"to the door, one to the corner of the house on  either side; and there  they "
"     'It  would  take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering "
"cliff's foot,  the orc-hold that  they had guessed  was near at hand: a wall "
or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the  guardians 
"old as my  uncle Iorlas. Still,' he added hopefully, 'I  wager I could stand "
"     Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared at "
"was a banner, silver upon  blue, a ship swan-prowed faring on  the sea;  but "
     Aragorn and Gandalf walked together  or sat speaking of  their road and 
"however,  and  quickly  the  matter  was  settled  without  him.  The  news  had  spread "
"Ellis Millimoe,4041591865156336,16-04-1995
"
"and laid  on the  portage-way. Then with little further hindrance, save from "
stricken in the valley; and they were piled in heaps till Dale was dark and hideous 
"     `Yonder is the Dimrill  Stair,'  said  Aragorn,  pointing to the falls. "
"up above them. They could hear  few  words, but it seemed plain to them that "
"Leighton Barnewell,4041374188574893,17-07-2000
"
"     `I wonder,' said Frodo. 'But I don't know. And that's the way of a real "
"     'They'll be hunting  for  me,' he  said. `I wonder how long I have been "
"Jourdain Matthisson,4090199341494642,06-02-1977
"
     No one answered him;  but he  saw their faces  grey with  fear and  the 
"and hated it worse than Biter if possible. Orcrist, too, had been saved; for Gandalf "
"Romeo Stailey,4041595493573309,21-03-1988
"
"he  hailed  the  others,  and  they  gathered  together,  and  holding  their  torches  above "
"since  the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and  picked "
name sounds  not  unfitting so.  Hobbits! No report that I have  heard  does 
     `Warning? Warning against what? ' said Boromir sharply. 
"nothing could  be  seen  in the darkness, and  there was not a sound in  the "
"riding in about ten  o'clock. 'There's a big band about four miles away,' he "
and Balin remembered. They wondered if they were still lying there .unharmed in 
"Brandon Gaunt,4760281544910191,23-08-1997
"
"     Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of "
"followed him, and  stood trembling,  looking with longing on the face of his "
"     And®nl pella, Vardo tellumar "
""
"`We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath "
Saruman most of all. Often he had  been for long  the  guest of the Lords of 
"     Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discover  "
"     'That's done it!'  said Sam. `Now I've rung  the front-door bell! Well, "
"dead, lying bare before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in "
"     The Nazgyl screeched and swept away, for their Captain was not yet come "
"Precious is gone.  Only poor  Smjagol all  alone.  No Preciou s.  Nasty  Men,  "
"     'Then I say  to you,'  said Faramir, turning to  Gollum, 'you  are under  "
seemed  heavy and the making  of  words wearisome. Just behind them  a large 
"Fanny Rivalant,4017958984486,26-06-1981
"
"tower of Minas Morgul. All was dark about it, earth and sky, but it  was lit "
"wind-drift of all just beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men were almost  "
"But I wish you all speed, and my house is open to you, if ever you come back this "
"of the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that which is "
"     'This is an ent-house,' he said, 'and there are no seats, I  fear.  But "
"Teeth  of  Mordor, two towers strong and  tall. In days long past they  were "
"aware of eyes  growing visible, two great clusters  of many-windowed eyes  -- "
"away from the lights and voices in the fields and tents, and followed by his "
then  let all the foes  of Gondor  flee!' Putting  it to  his lips he blew a  
 
"he fell;  and the great  troll-chief that  smote  him  down  bent over  him, "
"in his mind; and he saw Samwise the Strong, Hero of the Age, striding with a "
king's  folks  were  merrymaking.  At  last  after  much  blundering  they  came  to 
road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence. 
encouragement. 
before he had gone two paces after  his spring. Frodo coming behind  grabbed 
 
and menacing; his shadow filled the little room. 
"Artair Arnson,4041375670742,13-05-1975
"
"South, men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse. "
"     'You won't find  your clothes again,' said  Tom, bounding down from the "
curl of his lip and a  queer gleam in  his eye. 'But I  hope we shall get to 
     'I  have been  too busy with this and that  to  heed all the crying and 
"Aleen Ruddlesden,4041379082522,10-08-1999
"
"Leighton Durno,4017955740485,30-05-1992
"
while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown. 
####-that  pleasant  time  now  seemed  years  ago.  They were  alone  in  the  perilous waste 
"Devi Mounter,4041593230867787,30-05-1975
"
"the wheeling stars, and away to his right vast shadows against the sky where "
sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?' 
the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick! ' 
"     'I don't think, Mr. Frodo, that he's done much writing while we've been "
"     'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'Good-bye!' "
"hand, and she raised her shield against the horror of her enemy's eyes.  "
"once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago. "
""
Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind. 
"Kyle Skevington,4041599585049,13-05-1987
"
"     'Welcome, Jomer, sister -son!' said Thjoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I "
were overmastered. The  shield-wall was  broken. Erkenbrand of  Westfold has 
"Though as pretty a maidchild  as any one  could hope for, taking after  Rose "
"""Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth,"" he said. ""In the Lake-town we "
"     'Here  we will rest tonight,' said Aragorn. `This is the lawn  of Parth "
"     six thousand spears to Sunlending, "
to 
 
"rock, and in  the wall the Dark  Door  gaped  before them like  the mouth of "
getting  into  their  tubs.  Some  of  those  that  bobbed  along  by  him  in  the  gloom 
 
"but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly one spoke clearly "
again. The ripples  on the water  grew and came  closer;  some were  already  
"     The  morning was  still  young and cold when the Company set out again, "
with broken  rock. Neither key nor  the magic  it had once obeyed would ever  open 
"Even  a  fourteenth  share  was  wealth  exceedingly  great,  greater  than  that  of "
"Lulu Crunkhurn,4041596549444,24-04-1983
"
"before me, I think  that not for any friendship would I have taken the Paths "
the harsh croak of a bird. Balin shuddered. 
""
events that led  to  the  inclusion  of  the Shire  in the  Reunited Kingdom 
"     'Mercy, lord!' whined Wormtongue,  grovelling on the ground. 'Have pity "
"Rohan; and he  was  moved with pity, for  he saw that she was hurt,  and his "
"     `What?  ' cried  Gimli,  startled  out of  his  silence. `A  corslet of "
beside  the  standing  stone the  day  before. They  breakfasted now off the 
"and those that lie round about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time "
"passed  over them, leaving no  living  blade of green:  an  unfriendly waste "
"sounded. The king raised his  hand, and then silently  the host  of the Mark "
"     One Ring to  rule them all,  One  Ring to find  them, One Ring to bring "
"grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were  by that "
"soon they stopped or  passed out of hearing,  and  all was still.  His  head "
destroyed the fortresses in the north of the land. 
"Burke O'Sullivan,4915630422835,03-09-1979
"
"turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves,  where the "
     'To me it would  not seem that a Steward who  faithfully surrenders his 
"     'Thjoden King, Thjoden King!  Farewell! As a father you were to me. for  "
"     'Who  are   you,  and  what   d'you   think  you're  doing?'  said  the "
the Mark as they heard again afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and  
"     `I know,' said Frodo.  `They were terrible to behold! But why  could we "
"dark form, of man-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to "
     Without axin' leave should go makin' free 
     'So he will!' said Sam. 'He's a marvel!' 
should 
     and danced upon the floor. 
"swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist,  a glimpse of Strider leaping "
"Ryan Gookey,4483836140347,04-06-1987
"
"hatches in the walls at the side, and one of these was open. "
"     'Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked?' "
"####-up the cry: ""Up the Bowman, and down with Moneybags,"" till the clamour echoed "
"causeway that led up on to the Mountain's eastern side.  Thence, turning and  "
"a menace  and  a  dread while the banished  Enemy dwelt  yet far  away,  and "
"Hyacinth Virgo,4985102081229952,15-02-1993
"
"     'I would  bear you,' answered Gwaihir, 'whither you will, even were you  "
     And Imrahil said: 'But the Lady Jowyn was yet living when they bore her  
"####-far  away on our right, runs to the south  of it and passes not far from its "
have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of  the Nine cannot 
"lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it. "
####-Redhorn Gate may be  watched; and also  I have doubts of the weather that is 
comfort it.  I would have  spared him  a whole hand of mine rather. But he's 
corner away from  others. He drew his cloak aside and gazed at  it. The  air 
cliff-like walls  on  either side great  rents  and  breaches had been torn; 
"Krispin Cleal,4041594647274021,12-11-1981
"
and  the  shadows  the  grey-cloaked  people  of  Lurien  rode  towards  the 
"had seen  scars of  the  old wars, and the newer wounds made by the Orcs and "
"her  secrecy,  had fallen from  her, and her bright  hair, released from its "
not see them till the Sun is up.' 
"very least,' said Merry.  'They took an hour to  pass out of the gates. Some "
"hanging  in  a  row  from  a  high  branch.  Bilbo  was  horrified,  now  that  he  noticed "
"island; now they were laid bare again, peril had returned.  But  still Frodo "
"Anette Stiddard,4041371197007758,19-04-1988
"
"     The hobbits  fell asleep to the sound of  the soft singing of Bregalad, "
"the lowest and widest circle, a nd there  he was directed to the Lampwrights' "
first hardly more than a tremor of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as 
     Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again. He could not see 
try  and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on 
"Myrwyn Packman,4870751943134772,27-11-1998
"
let's get out of this foul hole!' 
himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to 
to be no  more  than two or three furlongs at the widest point.  How far  it 
"     The sun had gone down  red behind the hills at their backs, and evening "
"cried. ""Cut the bridges! To arms! To arms!"" "
River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.' 
"about westward and  came  up on the flank of  the enemy and from behind, and "
"beyond, when the  gates  of Minas  Morgul  opened, leaving the hobbits where "
"     Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.  "
places of honour.' 
the Greenway; and  not  far from Bree  I came upon  a traveller sitting on a  
well-earned comforts!' 
the door and watched. 
"It faced  southwards, and near the bottom it leaned  out  a little, so  that "
"     For a moment he stood, gasping,  clutching his breast. Then he drew his "
the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring 
turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.' 
"     `Why, sitting and thinking.  I do  a lot of that  nowadays, and this is "
"wretched creature at a disadvantage. In  the  end, gathering his courage, he "
before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed 
"beards combed and trimmed, and proud steps. Thorin looked and walked as if his "
"     'And what do you think that was?' Pippin asked at last, trying to speak "
"get at Ted, and I'd fell him ! ' "
"and more  frequent, Frodo  and Sam were driven to their left, well away from "
"brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed, "
"Jeddy Blaycock,4041379383576338,07-08-1984
"
lay hidden in the wastes of the North. Yet the line of Nimloth is older  far 
"Morly Mariotte,4041371278938376,21-05-1997
"
could tell what a Baggins would say on any question without the bother of asking 
"Stacee Sentinella,4690255950003894,22-07-1998
"
moved and fixed in different places according to the wind. 
those that have power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend; 
"     An hour, maybe,  went by, though it seemed far longer, and then at last "
branches;  for there  was a  warm  and gentle breeze blowing  softly   in the  
"the West, crying: "
"murmured:  `I  love  him. He's  like that, and  sometimes it shines through, "
     'It is ill dealing with such a  foe:  he  is a wizard both cunning  and 
up in the passage and forgotten about. 
"now. It appeared lonely  and forsaken, running  down to empty  ruins  in the "
his sides. 
"have  been  able  to  move  at  all.  As  it  was,  he  had  a  desperate  fight  before  he  got "
"For  me time the three companions stood still  and silent, troubled  by this "
"delightedly of the recovery of their treasure, when suddenly a vast rumbling woke "
""
with 
"altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone  to wield at "
"""Excitable  little  fellow,""  said  Gandalf,  as  they  sat  down  again.  ""Gets  funny "
"were  gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and  skipped on  the "
"Anyway, "
""
respectable  age  for a hobbit (the Old Took  himself had only reached 130); 
and swiftly and gladly it began to grow; and when the month  of June entered 
for him all would long ago have been lost. Nonetheless I do not yet claim to  
we get to the top of next stair. Not yet.' 
"bold  men and grim, and fierce in despair; and  the Easterlings  were strong "
"years was now revealed  in  many  fine lines  that  had before  been hidden, "
"companions; he  was quaking  as  if he was bitter cold,  but his  terror was "
search the ground again for signs of the hobbits. 
"     He sat down on the  ground, and taking  the dagger -hilt laid it  on his "
"So  Gandalf  went  on  with  the  tale,  until  he  came  to  the  fight  in  the  dark,  the "
"Erinna Gaffon,4017958112186988,16-04-1987
"
come to this House and trouble the sick.' 
flame and smoke went up. The  twigs crackled. Little fingers  of fire licked 
for those on foot. 
     `Then get busy and let an end down!' 
and sleeping were aware of them. He studies the signs: the Sword that robbed 
"Edik Jenkison,4041597565134861,02-11-1998
"
     So time and  the hopeless  journey wore away. Upon the fourth day  from  
"Walsh Dagon,4041378218124090,16-04-1980
"
"     At Great Smials the books were  of less interest to Shire-folk,  though "
 
"Shelob will get him,  not Smjagol: he promised; he won't hurt Master at all. "
Now we'll have to leg it double quick.' 
hadn't a' been  any hope  of his  ever coming back at all. Things  all  went 
"even your foolishness helped,  my lad. Let me see: some five days ago now he "
"stone,  and  the  dwarves with wagging  beards watching  impatiently.  The  sun  sank "
     'Alas  for Boromir! It was too sore a trial!  ' he said. `How you  have 
westering. 
"Kirby Devennie,4876946167124111,02-08-1990
"
to a real good meal tonight: something hot.' 
Fool. 
presentable.  You  are summoned to  the Lord  of the City to learn your  new 
enough  to escape Gandalf. Pop! he  sent a  smaller  smoke-ring from his short clay-
"####-     `This will be the death  of the halflings, Gandalf,'  said Boromir. `It "
reached save  by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is 
enter?' 
Isengard and was so polite.' 
"that set her in his path. For she is a fair maiden, fairest  lady of a house "
"years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the "
"     It  is  not,' said Frodo. ""Though I am not sure  that I understand you. "
"     Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of it they "
"ceased to  look up at the hill -tops, or the leaves on trees, or  the flowers "
sometimes 
too far gone to care. Besi de them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.  
"but whatever you  desire you  shall  take  with you, and  you shall ride  in "
find some  now. And  you might have  more trouble even  at the Buckland Gate 
smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all 
"Yet he had just the wit to play the part  that I set him. For you have come, "
"friends of the people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in "
either side were wrought of pearl and silver in the likeness of the wings of 
"you'll excuse  me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and  all, I'd best be turning for  "
"the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. 'It is said that the  skill of the "
"'Gildor Inglorion of  the  House  of Finrod. We are Exiles, and most of  our "
"     'The Lord's errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me,'  said "
"living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save perhaps a few,  "
"Ira Kisby,4041595944448,27-12-1979
"
     Stroke by  stroke they  laboured on. In the darkness it  was hard to be 
re-crossing. I cannot  tell  whether any of the hobbits have come back since 
"     'He  is  running  now  as  fast  as  the swiftest horse could  gallop,' "
 
"Hadlee Baldini,4041594345506,20-01-1979
"
"     `Maybe not,' said  Celeborn, `yet when you leave this land, you  can no "
     Pippin laughed. 'Very life-like!'  he said. 'But  wha t will happen when 
"the Sun;  but Saruman's  Orcs  can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder  "
"there with a candle  in one hand, and banging  on the  door with the  other. "
could not have borne that.' 
"Michelle McAusland,4017955465179727,17-12-1984
"
others  stood  amazed to hear such a sound come from those old bearded lips. 
our own kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there  are some of us 
His halls shall echo golden 
"very place where Faramir  had waylaid the men of Harad, and the road went in "
head was  stuck  outside  the  gate  and  a warg-skin was nailed to a tree just beyond. 
"amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected  the Ring to be demanded "
to know that he  hasn't got to ask.  He ought  to know that if we can't stop 
     Sam shuddered and tried  to force  himself to  move.  There was plainly 
Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!' 
"forwards for a long while, until they agreed at length to send out a couple of spies, "
he  thought was  the cause of Frodo's  sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did  
surprising earnestness.  
from his bed. The moon looked in over the edge of the dell. 
pantries. He was deep in thoughts of bacon and eggs and toast and butter when he 
"Gollum  crouched at bay, smelling and listening;  and Bilbo  was  tempted to "
     Not even an eagle  poised  against the sun would have marked the hobbits 
he 
     'For  already he knows that the messengers that  he  sent to waylay the 
"windows, at either end of the room, one looking east  and the other  looking  "
"has never been lifted, and the trees are older  than I am. Still, we do what "
     And as for Sauron: he  knew where she lurked. It pleased  him that  she 
you leave his mushrooms alone. Let's get into the lane and then we shan't be 
'And if hobbits of the Shire are to be  kept out in the wet on  a night like 
"     'Won't somebody give  us  a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said "
"Sibby Jeffcock,4227468364778,14-09-1979
"
"going for several hours with only  brief  halts,  when Gandalf came  to  his "
"her brow and a sweet fragrance about her,  was moved with  great wonder, and "
"then took  me  and showed  me to his dogs. ""See, lads,"" he  said, ""next time "
There  are  strange  things  living  in  the  pools  and  lakes  in  the  hearts  of mountains: 
""
"let out, if I strayed in!' "
"pipe.' At that his face clouded. 'No, not a pipe.  I don't think I'll  smoke "
"am  going  with  him, if   he climbs to the Moon,  and if  any of those Black "
and now only faintly   could be  heard the slapping of its feet as it went on 
"Shermie Hearn,4041378872312338,26-07-1978
"
"shall have to  go  over it all again together some time, if I am to write it "
"Reena Brunke,4041377295423,16-02-1992
"
them  they started  to haul up  first one dwarf and  then another and slash  them  free. 
"Courtenay Kann,4041594401636209,27-04-1979
"
"course rightly,' answered Aragorn. "
hold of Nob!' 
"     ' ""Worst is a bad word,"" I said to him, ""and I hope you do not  live to "
"race strange to  us  of the  silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not "
"     'No, Sam. Not yet anyway, not  further  than the Havens. Though you too "
"then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have  seized  "
popping up. What do you want now?' 
"     'In Erebor  in  the Kingdom of Dbin there is such skill,' said Aragorn; "
"####-     'I  can't  say,'  said Frodo, 'until  I  know more. How  many  of these "
silently.  Now  the  road  passing  about the skirts  of  Mindolluin  turned 
"Alessandra Orbell,4041595834272363,05-06-1999
"
####-Upon its  outer marges under the westward mountains Mordor was a dying 
"evening, when  sun  has  been  all  day  on  the  snow  far  up  above.  There was  only  a "
'Good morning!'  said Pippin.  'Gandalf will come  as soon as  he may. He is 
"     Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some  outward "
Hopes fail. An end comes.  We have only  a little  time to wait  now. We are 
"reminds me: what's become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?' "
"be yours, and we trust to your gratitude when your kingdom is regained."" "
""
"     'Well, what else could  I say?' said Merry. 'I'm sorry, Pippin, but you  "
the grim flanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right  
"     'They did not die!' said Treebeard. 'I never said died. We lost them, I "
he will go -- we shall be lost.' 
"been sounded for  a hundred years, not  since the white wolves came  in  the "
"she stood before  Aragorn she paused suddenly and  looked  upon him, and her "
"     Jowyn  it  was,  and  Dernhelm  also. For into Merry's mind flashed the "
"the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it  off and held it up, and "
"took out his  knife, cleaned and whetted it, and began to dress the rabbits.  "
since the dark before dawn.' 
ever -changing  colour. It  was as if  they  stood  at  the  window  of  some 
waved 
thinner and  less tangled. Then  deep  folds  in  the ground were discovered 
"vaulted chamber,  draped as it  were with the great shadows that  the little "
"neck, while something wrapped itself about his leg.  Taken off  his guard he "
"have that  tell of these things, but we are forgetting them,  teaching  them "
"as a queen among other queens: not a mistress of many  slaves, nay, not even "
 
"     Then  she brought  the  cup to each of the Company, and bade them drink  "
"     'The  Halflings  are  courteous  folk,  whatever  else  they  be,' said "
"on  and  blink.  The  sun  was  shining  brilliantly,  and  it  was  a  long  while  before  he "
     Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken. 
"from  inside,  and  out  crept  a most  unhappy  dwarf. Wet  straw was  in  his  draggled "
"     Hobbits have a passion  for mushrooms,  surpassing  even  the greediest  "
"     ' ""White! ""  he sneered. ""It serves as a beginning. White  cloth may be "
"the  distant Sea; and  so they  rode down at  last to Mithlond,  to the Grey "
"     'I myself am  in the Warden's  keeping,' answered Faramir. 'Nor  have I "
arriving out of the South the City  was as well  manned  as might be. Scouts 
they crept across the plain. Houses and barns were burning.  Then from  many 
"     `It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, `and not with the wind.' "
"Fredericka Ilyinski,4041592682787790,19-04-1978
"
"####-     'When Saruman  was  safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before he set "
"""Biter  and Beater!""  they  shrieked;  and  soon  they were  all  in  confusion,  and most "
"""Come  down! Come  down!""  he  shouted  to  the  dwarves  on  the  branch.  ""Don't "
Cirith Ungol------' He broke  off and  strode to  the window as if his  eyes 
"Egon Gehrts,4128588883604616,22-05-1999
"
"""Five  hours march,  I  should  think.  It will  be  rough  going.  The  road  from  the "
"     'Indeed we have heard  of Fangorn in  Minas Tirith,' said Boromir. `But "
""
"but  he  was ever hindmost, pursued  by a groping horror that  seemed always "
"####-who showed you mercy, keep silent! ' "
"passed away. These were Men  of  other  race, out  of  the  wide  Eastlands, "
"""Well,  er,  I  thought,  don't  you  know,""  said  Bilbo  rather  confused,  ""that,  er, "
he had been their guide through many perils.  
not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed  was that he  could 
"Mercy Feldbau,4041370642759930,22-04-1991
"
"Bevvy Caller,4017955282328952,11-12-1984
"
his hand. 
"vanquished foes,' said Aragorn. 'We will send him to the Falls of Rauros and  "
"I think that in the end, if all  else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last "
"speed, though whenever they got  a glimpse of the sun  in an open glade they "
"Luce Chanter,4017955148002619,19-02-1989
"
"direction,  the  others  brought  him  a  rope.  They  had  several with  them, and on  the "
"They were  drawing near to  the  grey  hill-country of  the  Emyn  Muil, the "
remember.' 
"was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay  a little while longer  "
"Stephanus Gieraths,4041599481747388,09-08-1991
"
"jumped,  seven  feet  forward  and  three  in  the  air;  indeed, had he known  it, he only "
"and get back on to our course, we must  cross at once and bear right.' "
"     The  local hobbits  stared in  amazement, and then sprang to their feet "
"Cindie Throssell,4041376690095,24-11-1984
"
"hands folded upon  his breast,  his eyes unclosed, blending living night and "
"Certainly Sam was urgent. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone,' he said. "
"Lilllie Laxton,4017953279760337,06-03-1996
"
"""Only  a  bat,  I  suppose  and  hope!""  he  said  miserably.  But  now  what  am  I  to "
"narrow bridge of stone without a parapet, as narrow as a pony could well walk on; "
right  back  up  into  the  mountains-from  which  you  can  guess  that  he  could  travel 
"war shall go, may it not so end  that much that was fair and wonderful shall "
curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire  to hide. The 
hoped to get him to come nearer so easily he was disappointed. 
"mud. The travellers were  light, or maybe none of them would ever have found "
Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-dyr do not return. But I wou ld 
"them  company  for  a  while.  He  had  eaten  most,  talked  most,  and  laughed  most. "
 
weaponless.' 
"there went up a jeering yell. Dust  rose smothering the air,  as from nearby "
"     ' ""To put up some sheds for Sharkey,"" says they. "
shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards. 
 
and  finding  the  entrance. He  had  never  bothered  to wonder  how  the  treasure was 
"paddled in the Pool at Bywater with Jolly Cotton and Tom and Nibs, and their "
Scary; so that there was a great deal better cheer that Yule than anyone had 
"Jilli Signorelli,4915480988786,12-12-1985
"
until the round red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then  an empty 
first serious check.  Before  him stood a wide dark arch  opening into three 
"Kessiah Danielsohn,4809919157577384,21-09-1995
"
     But Jomer  said: 'Already you have raised the banner  of the Kings  and 
none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.' 
but if he  paid special attention to Hobbiton and Bywater no one blamed h im. 
And beats high mountain down. 
     Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted one that 
""
"Sofie Cutten,4017954928724591,11-08-1999
"
"from the pans, sharing the  old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half "
"Keane Ridoutt,4041593019938,02-05-1992
"
prisoner. And I am no spy.  My folk  have never had dealings with any of the 
     For lost of yore was Nimrodel 
"and followed them no more, but went back disappointed to their dark colony.  "
"Viva Josipovitz,4664704384958480,21-09-1981
"
ere the power and craft of N®menor waned in exile; and its outward  face was 
when the waters sank in a drought. 
"any burns, luckily. He  did not want  his  folk to hurt themselves in  their "
"Kathrine Tedman,4017951294495,18-12-1996
"
"Gollum's head by his thin lank hair, stretching  his long neck, and  forcing "
for Men. 
""
"there  spoke long together, and bitter was  their parting that should endure "
"Seka O'Dowling,4285115247358,26-12-1975
"
"the Road.  Sam  and  Strider  went  forward, but they found no  sign of  any "
"long tale to please everybody at  all  points, nor to displease everybody at "
     'Now let  us take our ease  here for a little!' said Aragorn.  'We will 
"     Of these words we could understand little, and we  spoke to our father, "
""
"where we were they were planted here  and there all over the Shire, and were "
"Crista Connealy,4017952679207,16-07-1980
"
####- * BOOK IV *  
nimble ones of the hobbit lads and lasses to the well-worn and horny ones of 
"     'If they come to  bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a  "
     Forth rode Thjoden. Five nights and days 
"day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first.  He can ride "
into the air: it vanished in a flash of flame. 
such strength of men as were willing to go  or could be spared. On the walls 
     'Ware! Ware!' cried Damrod  to his  companion. 'May the Valar turn  him 
"Minnie Garralts,4041375436847478,02-02-1980
"
"     But at that same moment  there was a flash, as if lightning  had sprung "
"feet in length,  swinging on mighty chains. Long had  it been forging in the "
Hearing and of Sight. In the days  of the  great kings there were high seats 
"your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.' "
"up Bagshot Row, and that  was a sad blow  to  him. He's in one of  them  new "
at Faramir he burst into tears. 
'For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish  to  enter the City 
Cross-roads of the Fallen King. All now was ready for the last throw.  
"     Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short black  "
"always wandering about, and it saved my life that day)-well, from a good way off "
"to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that  I want  - I don't rightly "
""
"bind his eyes; and Frodo said: 'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes "
"crouched  right  down with  his  flat  hands  splayed  on  the  floor, and his head  thrust "
"     'Nay, lady,' he said, and taking her by the hand he raised her. Then he "
"things  in  his pack.  Somehow  each of them had become dear to him, if only "
he was too  small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never  
desperate  stage of his journey. So now  they crossed the stony bed and took  
"were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more before the rest were "
"either,  nor  tea  nor  toast  nor  bacon  for  his  breakfast, only cold mutton and  rabbit. "
"and  their  kinship  is rather  with  the  Bardings  of  Dale, and with  the "
keystone  carven  in  the  likeness of a crowned and  kingly  head.  Gandalf 
"     That day  the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command  "
""
"cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing  in  food for many years and  his table "
"appeared. There were no paths  in the  undergrowth, and they did not  get on "
     'No  indeed!' said  Frodo.  'But  in the  meantime what course am I  to 
"To fly would be folly,  "
Gollum. 
     and wind upon my hair. 
     Beside the roaring sea. 
further.' 
"guiding on you,' he said. `You are a wise  beast, and  have  learned much in "
"Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax "
"at Gandalf with his white beard,  and  the light that  seemed to  gleam from "
open. There he could see the heads  of the trees descending in ranks towards 
"     As arrow from the string, "
"in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril, Jowyn. Were I  to "
"     'To  walk  to Bucklebury as  quickly as possible,'  answered Frodo, and "
"'Then there  is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!' he said. 'Few "
his deep eyes showed that he  was startled and indeed  alarmed. 'It has been 
"Ignacius Botting,4041592680112496,25-03-2001
"
"of  it) be guessed more or  less  right, as you will  see. Having made up his mind he "
dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it  was not the red of dawn. Across 
that he could tell of the Lady of Rohan. 
guessed. The Goblins  are upon you! Bolg*  of the North is coming. O Dain! whose 
"the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn, "
"""If  you  had  dusted  the  mantelpiece  you  would  have  found  this  just under  the "
"Xever Wishart,4041597137490320,20-08-1977
"
"himself from muttering, for  his master's ear alone as  he thought: 'It's  a  "
Nice 
     are like old bones 
"could see  the path  going  almost  straight forward.  Before them, but some "
"Jsandye Aughton,4041592477412166,07-09-2001
"
As for Bilbo he could easily have  trotted  through his  legs without ducking his 
"counsel.  It  touched  his  heart,  as  well (may I  say it) as pleasing his "
Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought  Bilbo's behaviour was absurd. For the 
"Man  and a Hobbit,  your  judgement is  poorer than  I  imagined. They're as "
"its aid."" So  we mounted again before  night had passed and went on with all  "
"there. But  I got  through,  and  I'm going to  get  out.  It can't be  more "
"them; for trolls, as you probably know, must be underground before dawn, or they "
"Karlen Sweynson,4041376176954,24-02-1997
"
"Agnes Mounce,4199227539141,21-10-1980
"
     There on the wide  flats beside the noisy river were marshalled in many 
"oddments, perhaps, after all,'  he thought  with  a strange sense of relief;  "
and from the hardy mountaineers of Ered  Nimrais. And they made a truce with 
and the  evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you will part with 
     `What other fairer way would you desire? ' said Aragorn. 
"the mists were gone. A  chill wind blew. The moon, now  waxing round, filled "
"go  back  to  the  stuff  of  the  mountains  they  are  made  of,  and  never  move  again. "
"down under the forest-roof, and it was everlastingly still and dark and stuffy. Even "
"jets  of  flame.  There  was a flicker like green fire in his  eyes, and his "
"     A lord of tree and glen, "
     `How long  do you  think I  shall have here?' said  Frodo to Bilbo when 
"     'As  much as we must,' said Pippin with  a sinking heart, but trying to "
"saw Durin's Bane,' said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes. "
"Maddie Gunderson,4041378109744774,07-01-1993
"
Towers of the Teeth like vultures; and they knew that they were watched. But 
####-in  the beginning of the realm of Gondor. But when Sauron returned and  grew 
     He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain 
Then there is a blur followed by Flui under grass near Mirror mere. The next 
"Jewel Doram,4582131472550,21-06-1981
"
"Wilmar Rillstone,4041373718854601,22-09-1993
"
"underground places are drowned, and  the outlets blocked, then  Saruman must  "
Galadriel; but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the Grey 
flesh of he dared not guess what creature. 
see  the  goblins  dancing  round  and  round  in  a  circle  like  people  round  a 
"the venture, or I would not have brought you here. Do as you will!   ' "
"of  Rivendell,  where  stood  the  Last  (or  the  First)  Homely  House.  Again  it  was "
     At that moment  a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to 
"     'It's like  this,' he began,  hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I've "
"thought daunted and defeated, there  they were lit with a fell light  again, "
"####-with  fear,  on  a wide  shelf  of  rock  on  the mountain-side. There was no path down "
"Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting. "
"Rik Gallon,4017950184242,29-12-1978
"
""
"     'They are a strange company, these  newcomers,'  said Gimli. 'Stout men "
"about you, Merry?' "
"Leshia Benzies,4954657358648,23-05-1996
"
     A Elbereth Gilthoniel 
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore. 
warm  and  merry  there;  and  men  came  from  far  and  wide  to  feast  at  Beorn's 
across the Gap  of  Rohan. It does not seem the  sort  of place for  Ents to 
is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.' 
old 
"over the old man's face; but he  bent his head and held out his hand, laying "
"winding  upward,  now climbing in  short  flights of well-laid  steps.  Many "
"Bregalad  was now listening intently, although to them,  down in the dell of "
returned  to  eat and talk with them. Often he  took Gimli with him  when he 
"opening that led  to another stairway,  dark  and narrow: it appeared  to go "
"     'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if you  "
"globe,  the  height  of a man, though its  half  was buried  in the  ground. "
Mirkwood. 
"     ' 'Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,' I said. "
"####-     'Sam, you can make  a  dash for  Cotton's  farm, if  you like. He's the "
 
began  to chant softly in a  slow tongue unknown to the  Elf  and Dwarf; yet  
"     in Elder Days, in years of yore. "
"encumbered  with fallen  rock  and stones; but they found a way, hugging the "
"Vonny Back,4267640493418,02-02-1983
"
their  companionship:  they  will  gnaw  one  another  with  words.  But the 
more. 
"know that somewhere there is a firm  foothold, even if my feet  cannot stand "
"Fanchette Grushin,4702939560063,21-05-1993
"
"     'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself!  Don't  get  lost,  and don't  "
"####-Great  in arms, open or  secret. All lands east of Anduin  shall be Sauron's "
the roof. 
"sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog  rolled up "
####-Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.' 
"     ' I am  strangely weary,' she said. 'I must rest a little. But tell me, "
     from Otherworld beyond the Sea 
and  Miss Melilot Brandybuck  got on a  table  and with bells in their hands 
"     'You have  my promise,' said Legolas. 'But  alas!  Now  we  must  leave "
     'But I don't think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone you can 
""
"Adi Plumm,4041595516320803,09-11-1977
"
"Gerrard Tunnow,4899027511287,09-04-1990
"
"     'Now,  Gollum,'  he said, 'I've  another job for you. Go and fill these "
was not at  all to their liking as a  bedroom.  It had  no walls. not even a  
"the land  of Gondor, though  maybe  he will not ride back. But it is a  long "
come to help them.' 
did not shut their eyes. 
inside  the  hall  and  outside  it. The  quays were  thronged with  hurrying  feet.  Some 
away over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.' 
""
them. The stars grew thick  and bright in  the sky  above.  No one  stirred. 
""
"peaceful  now after all  the turmoil. And safer too, somehow,  since Gandalf "
three more hours.  
"it saw a great silent shape, cloaked in  a grey shadow, looming against  the "
some calculations on his fingers. 'Only nine days ago!' he  said.1 'It seems 
"     `Well, have a care!  ' said  Boromir.  `I do not feel too sure  of this "
"Averell Saipy,4017950588304096,14-02-1990
"
ruffians are there?' 
"     The others soon did the same, and no sound  or  dream  disturbed  their "
"Anton Aggiss,4041598153856,27-09-1976
"
"you through! A terrible business, and it nearly was disastrous. But other news can "
"####-d'yer want? And time's been up our way, when yer'd have said 'thank yer Bill' for a "
"little  short  thick  legs  for Gandalf  and Thorin, while  at  the  far  end  he  put Beorn's "
     In  a chill hour they came  to the end of  the water-course. The  banks 
"scarlet robes  were tattered, his  corslet of overlapping brazen  plates was "
"     Aragorn and  Jomer and Imrahil rode back towards  the Gate of the City,  "
"Elvis Castangia,4041597087741,03-11-1999
"
"three he  has recovered,  and the others the  dragons have consumed. Nine he "
"appeared, he rushed  out, followed by  Aragorn and the. others  with flaming  "
the top of  the southern bank above the pool. It  was now dark and the falls 
think you need worry about Bilbo. 
"Katy Siccombe,4462585503639125,11-12-1992
"
"far. 'I wonder if that  is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as "
"     `By all the  signs, Captain  Shagrat, I'd say there's  a  large warrior  "
"Emmalee Theodoris,4017956662838339,02-12-1982
"
sick.  Then  it seemed to those  who  stood by that  in the glow  the  faces 
""
"tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for  one, "
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. ' 
"     `I do call it the wind,' said Aragor n. `But that does not make what you  "
"Lisa Dalgety,4017950758888,06-06-1976
"
     'Would that day  was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm 
     Chapter 9   The Great River  
"talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that "
"     'But that, of  course, would only make the evil  part of him angrier in "
thrust out into emptiness.  
"a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his  features were over -shadowed, except for  "
"were  written by many different hands, in runes, both of Moria  and of Dale,  "
Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.' 
"covering on his previous visit, and was itching for a closer view for reasons of his "
Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back. 
"     `But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring  were  destroyed as you  "
"Lilas Vaggs,4147130699916,14-01-1987
"
####-crash  and a flash of  flame and  smoke. The waters  of  the  Deeping-stream 
from Min-Rimmon even to Pinnath Gelin and the far coasts of the sea; and all 
"waited-all except Bilbo, who popped on his ring and slipped quickly to one side. "
could  leap on him. He caught up a big branch all on fire at one end; and Bert got 
"brands. Caught between  fire and water, and seeing  an Elf-lord revealed  in "
behind. 
     You wouldn't forget me. 
seemed that  in  all the City she  only  was ailing  and sorrowful.  And the 
"Joseph Durrance,4017955589485331,13-03-1976
"
"Gandalf for  a  long while,  and I ought to know what  is  the  danger  that "
"left  an  orphan  and  stranded,  as  you  might   say,  among  those  queer  "
only  to the  one task of going on. In  the dimness  of  its dreary day  few 
"that it was  almost filled with clear water, from which came the light;  and "
"him, and for a moment he hesitated. Faramir's eyes watching him grew harder. "
"one  resides  in the  freedom of the reader, and the  other in  the purposed "
"kindled in his eyes.  He  laughed wildly. 'Later!' he  cried, and his  voice "
"answered. 'I am great headman, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn. I count many things: stars in "
"said, 'O Lady of  Lurien of whom were sprung Celebrnan  and Arwen  "
"either side, and the floor  was level  and sound,  without  pits or  cracks. "
haven't  lost more than two days  by  my short  cut through the Forest!  But 
"that province  had  long been sparsely peopled. And they became  our allies,  "
"the open country at sundown they overtook an old man leaning on a staff, and "
horsemen. Already the companies were preparing to start: men were tightening 
"peril through hurt or wound, or who lay under the Black  Shadow. And "
"there  is a frost  in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and they  fail of their "
"     'As you  will,'  said Gandalf. 'But  make all  the speed you may to the "
makes its name so dreadful? ' 
####-thought how  great and terrible a Lord he might have become in the  strength 
driven by fear that time was too short. 
and  men  and  elves  after  the  long  desolation;  but  it  may  cost  you  dear  in  gold.  I 
     'But I  reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They  
their 
they  were healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew 
"wind.  They waited wondering. Before long there came  the sound of hoofs, at "
point where he had begun to nod. 
"Reggie Skally,4017952362083599,06-01-2001
"
"     'Five days ere I set out on this venture, eleven days ago at about this "
"waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?' "
Smjagol knew ' 
"race of Dwarves, the Longbeards, and my first ancestor: I am his heir."" "
     Praise them! 
"unimportant in it. Actually I must say he put on his ring early in the business, and "
"Wainwright Ferrer,4041373301696,08-08-1997
"
"oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the "
"Addy Downer,4041596856856,17-11-1995
"
"     'That is true,' said Gandalf. 'I  do not  counsel you to leave the City "
"and they were eager for his story, especially wanting to know why the dragon had "
swine. You've no guts outside your own sties. But for us you'd all  have run 
of the  Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond a nd the  Glittering Caves.  Do 
"liked  meat  too.  Goblin  he  thought  good,  when  he  could  get  it;  but  he  took  care "
"even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grows very strong, stronger than Wraiths. Lord "
my  hearties!  If you  come  soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you  
will prove  an easier way of  assault upon the Dark Lord  than  his northern 
"like an owl in  the daylight, for  tears blinded him; and through  a mist he "
'But there is only one way through the mountains  that will  bring me to the 
"Arnold Jacson,4017954701934,08-09-1994
"
"him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not like the place  "
"Anthe Sive,4041370111504080,30-08-1995
"
     'No hope  of escape!' thought Pippin. 'But there is a hope  that I have 
here down in the valley! 
####-     The hobbits led the way; and they  passed under the arch  and came to a  
     The Road goes ever on and on  
"knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May "
see the starlight glimmering on their hair and  in their  eyes. They bore no  
"     'We will have peace,' said Thjoden  at last thickly and with an effort. "
forsaken country. The only green was the scum  of  livid weed  on  the  dark  
"go on the first watch, as a  reward,' he growled, as he  rolled himself in a  "
"windows,  could  still be heard  faintly from the garden. For  a  moment the "
     'Halt!' yelled Ugl®k. 
near the shadow of the Mountain. 
"     'I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven't changed it.' "
"come at last,' he said: 'the day of choice which we have  long delayed. What "
"flowers, or  red,  or pale green; and  marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys,  "
     So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate  of the Men of Gondor at 
had retired for a while and left his  friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye 
"     'We shall  see,  we  shall see,' said  Gandalf. 'Will you come now with "
"camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, a nd they were six days out "
"     Sam,  however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At least "
     'Praise them with great praise!' 
"nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll "
there are not many more hobbits that have become like  this.  It  would be a  
fit for the king's table. There is a feast tonight and it would not do to send up poor 
"I  followed  these  as  far  as  the  Carrock.  There  they  disappeared  into  the  river, "
You'll never catch me up your tree! 
"blocked  the  lower  end,  then,  if  he  is  so  eager  to  keep  us  out?  He  has  not,  or  we "
"     Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,  "
and roared into flame. 
"bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet "
"where  a   few  swift  horses  were  kept,  hard  by  the  lodgings  of  the "
"     `I have  looked  the  last  upon that which was  fairest,' he  said  to "
"concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient  history, and the remnants of "
"     'This is  an  heirloom of  our house,' said Jowyn. 'It was made  by the "
"movement.  Sam bent  down and said  fissh close to his ear, but there was  no "
"bitter  spike.  Deep,  deep it pricked, as Sam was  crushed  slowly  to  the "
"Tobit Cleugh,4072621961635,25-05-1996
"
"Dulcy Kunz,4017957360524866,22-08-1991
"
seen. The light of the  shaft fell directly  on a table in the middle of the 
"     'Oh yes,  you had,' said  Gandalf. 'You  knew you were behaving wrongly "
"mantelpiece. It will be safe enough  there, till Frodo comes.  I  shall wait "
fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nought to go with them but a 
these marks?' 
"yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to  submit to  Sauron, or "
"to  hasten from him. She  reached  the hole,  and  squeezing down, leaving a  "
"Willa Pollendine,4041376286644031,06-10-1981
"
"Duncan Russam,4041379558158,05-03-1985
"
"the plains  of Anduin,  while east and southwards  the slopes  were bare and  "
the party gathered and discussed what was to be done. 
and  behind  him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So great an  army 
####-a  glint  and  a  tinkle  as  he  stumbled  on  some  golden  thing. The  light grew  smaller 
southwards towards them. 
     'But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It's 
"kind to Smjagol. Don't let  Him have  it. Or go away.  go to nice places, and "
travelling  company  of dwarves  going  West come  in  this evening. And now 
     He knelt  down  and  carefully  folded his elven-cloak. It went  into a  
"Kort Birkwood,4017954948557666,22-06-1982
"
 
"Davina Sherborne,4017954714724912,15-06-1989
"
"""Fools!""  laughed  Bard,  ""to  come  thus  beneath  the  Mountain's  arm!  They  do "
"Gearard Wong,4041372810358,06-09-1985
"
thought that he was trying to  rouse Frodo; then he saw that it was  not so. 
Gamling. 'And neither will  the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their 
"pale  morning: in the East,  behind long  clouds like lines  of  soiled wool "
""
"and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the "
"La verne Crampton,4041593207317634,22-12-1988
"
"Caresa Spink,4041590114823,30-03-1996
"
"Scotty Pourvoieur,4041594296052108,12-05-1978
"
"     'Then  we must  set  out  as soon as may be,' said Jomer.  'Even so  we "
"from  battle and long  journey, and I will  now go to rest. Tarry here  this "
""
Awake!' he cried. 'It is a red dawn. Strange things await us by the eaves of 
"my belt. Not  for  use on trees,' he  added hastily, looking  up at the tree "
"bramble, and roofed with the first leaves and  shoots  of spring. There they "
 
     and burning as an island star 
"     beneath an old grey hill, "
"Wilburt Watsham,4041592099717,15-05-1976
"
that would not abate. 
up  the steps like a draggled  rat. There is someone  in  the tower still: a  
"be the Lord of the Fields of Rohan, mark you! You must welcome  him as  well "
than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was unexpected and rather  
"(""not  just  now""  he  thought).  They  were  particularly  interested  in  the  riddle-"
"menacingly. He could not see  the hobbit, but now he was on  the alert, and he had "
"platters  laid beside them, as if  they had just eaten  well, and now rested "
"food, though no fire. At one  time the water flowed  down  through this cave "
was derived from the D®nedain. But  the Hobbits  may  have learned it direct 
"We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll star t tonight.' "
strength. 
"""Where  are  you  going?""  said  Thorin,  in  a  tone  that  seemed  to  show  that  he "
     Frodo opened his mouth  and shut it again. His  look of surprise was so 
tongue: 
"sister -daughter!' he said. 'Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall  return  to "
"the Dwarrowdelf. And  of  old  it was  not  darksome, but  full of light and "
""
"nasty, and that put him out of temper. What is more they made him hungry; so this "
the  eve  of  the  sudden assault a dream came to  my brother in a  troubled 
####-     Forth Eorlingas! 
"He clawed a t the nearest rabbit, already skinned and lying by the fire. "
perceive.  Perilous to us all  are the devices  of an  art  deeper  than  we 
"will  concerning  the said Frodo, and until  that is  made known, he  cannot "
took store  of  goods to Osgiliath and thence by  ship  to Cair  Andros; but 
visitors hanging on the bell.  I might find somewhere where I  can finish my 
mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow drum-beats:  
"Sammath Naur, and the side  of  the cone was riven open,  and  a  huge fiery "
""
 
with the newcomers.  Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized  that without moving 
and for that we cannot wait.' 
"it. That might be  well, if  reason could show any hope of doing so. It does "
"     'All penalty  is remitted  for  your valour in battle,  and still  more "
"purple  shadows of its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising "
"Drogo,' he  said. `You shall have an hour, and  you  shall be alone. We will "
"of journey had fleeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was at hand again, "
"guard  the  way out, lest the 'thief' should escape.  Warily Bilbo  followed "
"Hammad McCahey,4017956385728,23-12-1981
"
doors and arched gates were carved many fair letters  of strange and ancient  
"Gandalf  sat  at  the  head  of  the  party with  the  thirteen,  dwarves  all  round:  and "
"Carlie Maclaine,4529707645499,02-02-1978
"
"     Besides,  at  the  end  of a  long  night -march, and  after bathing and "
     'Not a bird! ' said Sam mournfully. 
There was a heavy silence. 
or 
through the open window.  
"more  not  to  ransom  himself  with  promises  to  the  king  of  a  share  in  the  treasure, "
"and  as it came low, almost to the gable,  there came a cry that stopped our "
     It was  Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He  had sat and watched 
"Sonnie Piegrome,4041594249146,14-02-1998
"
"raiment, through  grass and  brake. All were  hooded  and  masked,  and  had "
stronger  every  day.  There  were  no  more  groans  or  grumbles.  They  drank  his 
     And meat was hard to come by. 
paved  way that climbed towards  the Citadel turned  first this way and then 
"enter.  And  underneath  small and faint  is written:  I, Narvi,  made them. "
"Lucho Howie,4041379311949177,27-07-1997
"
mouth 
     He saw the Mountain silent rise 
"his hand. She should not die, so fair, so desperate At  least she should not "
hated worse any one that carried it. 
that he judges that the  strong arms of the Rohirrim would  be better within 
"sharers of a  secret hope, of  which even  to you,  lord, I cannot yet speak "
"     'Hrum, Hoom,'  murmured  the  voice,  a deep  voice  like a  very  deep "
"down your own house  when you destroyed  mine. And now, what  ship will "
"and he had just  caught them and brought them back towards the others,  when "
folk that are heedless.' 
"could master them. But we needed a call. You came  back in the nick o' time, "
 
"At  length  they  reached  the  hill  path.  It  scrambled  steeply  up,  and  they  plodded "
"Mab Muddle,4196925005488592,10-06-1987
"
"free fields; but she, born  in the body of a maid, had  a spirit and courage "
"     'Farewell, and may you find what  you  seek!' cried Jomer. 'Return with "
darkly upon Gandalf.  
"     'The Paths of the Dead!' said Thjoden, and trembled. 'Why do  you speak "
"####-chosen, because it is perilous?' "
"     There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a  good voice, and the song  "
"Now  it  is  a  strange  thing,  but  things  that  are  good  to  have  and  days  that  are "
some time they sat in silence; and then Sam  looking round  at  the room and 
they  soon  gave  that  up.  It  seemed  to  bring  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  eyes  all 
"It  sounded  truly  terrifying. The walls  echoed  to  the  clap,  snap!  and  the  crush, "
     For a time they  sat together with bowed heads and did  not speak. Then 
"     The hinges creaked again, and Sam, now  peering over  the corner of the "
Will  you  come and see it?  Also there  is a matter on which I desire  your 
his view was screened  by a  tall line of beans on poles; but above and  far 
"Nazgyl have crossed the River!  Ride, ride! Wait  not for the  dawn! Let not  "
"####-     Upon the very Eve of Midsummer, when  the sky  was blue as sapphire and "
"while,' said Aragorn.  'Let him do so, if he  wishes. He may walk a little in "
"Ricard Ancketill,4335728979903,22-07-1978
"
"     'Well, no one troubled us,' said Pippin, 'and we came along slowly, and "
Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was 
white form of the Lady  was small and  distant. She  shone like a window  of 
"eyes, and fear overcame his wrath. He  gave a great cry, and  turned, leaped "
fourteen  miles with only one rest  at noon. It was now three  o'clock. They 
"that Men  call Ents,  dwelt there  long ago; for Fangorn is old, old  even as "
"was a good brew,  and Pippin found himself more than compensated for "
"howling and  slunk away. Fear  fell on them seeing Gandalf in the moon,  and "
"     `Well,' said Boromir, `when heads are  at a  loss bodies must serve, as "
"he added seeing  the  wonder  in the  men's  faces. 'Not  he, yet one of his "
"gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw  it: Barad-dyr,  Fortress of Sauron. "
"     For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim, "
""
"food and then  lay down,  but Gollum was restless.  He would  not eat any of "
"Master Boromir,' he added, and turned. It was then that they discovered that "
knew where he came from.' 
"that  Gandalf  was  describing.  He  nodded  and  he  growled,  when  he  heard  of  the "
"""Sh!  sh!""  they  hissed,  when  they  heard  his  voice:  and  though  that  helped  the "
and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.' 
""
"front of their iron helms was set an S-rune, wrought of some white metal. "
parched that he could no longer swallow even a mouthful of food. It remained 
"of the Lord of  Gondor,  stabbed ever and anon by his  shrewd questions, and "
hear their shiftings  and their soft stamping on  the needle-covered ground. 
"Tooks, and other  guests that lived or  were staying near.  By mid-day, when "
"Jakob Pace,4041373957141,12-07-1995
"
Day drew on. The goblins gathered again  in  the valley. There a host of Wargs 
     'Why would that make you happy?' said Legolas.  
"     Gollum, however, did not  intend to  be  got rid  of, yet. He knelt  a t "
"face  was fair  and young, save that  a peace lay on it beyond the reach  of "
####-     The others remained long by the river -side. For some time they had been 
"through the First Hall, and out! But come and look! ' "
"as light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.' "
"mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed  or inhaled, through pipes  of "
"the last  Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net "
"it seemed to his eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering, very slowly, "
""
"they said  was believed: news from Bree,  and not sure  as Shiretalk , as the "
a young tree in a windless night.  
"Maggie Messenbird,4041376474841647,03-11-1976
"
"     `Off hunting, I suppose,' said Sam and yawned. It was his turn to sleep "
call it  - saving that where there's such  a lot of folk  there must be wells 
"before. After that the journey went well,  and the days went quickly by; for  "
"so far  north, unless  we must. But  in these days of watchfulness we do not "
"cavernous  gate, shaped like an open mouth with gleaming  teeth,  was gaping "
"     `With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly  to Gondor . "
"####-     'The Ring!' said Frodo, now completely amazed. "
"     'Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting  discussions, and made "
the feet of his enemy. A shrill  cry rang  out in the night;  and he felt  a  
"was clothed in a tunic of wool down to his knees, and was leaning on a large axe. "
"what put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it was well done. "
"prey,  taken at  unawares in wild career, broke, scattering like sparks in a  "
"     'I  would  grieve  indeed,'  said  Frodo.  Then catching  the  look  in "
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some 
     His voice sounded thin and  quavering in the cold dark tower: the voice 
"Neddie Trevear,4180029622954,21-11-1997
"
"mountain-shadow,  protected  from the north  by the  Emyn Muil, open  to the "
the West  behind them.  The township  and  the  fords  of  Ciril  they found 
"come  upon a village,  Bree under Bree -hill, with  doors  looking  westward.  "
"     'True indeed,' said Jomer. 'But I do not doubt you, nor the  deed which "
"     'I daresay you would,' snarled Ugl®k stepping up from behind.   'Meaning "
"knowledge  was deep,  his thought  was  subtle,  and his hands  marvellously  "
"his, and he let a great part of his  own former power pass  into it, so that "
"to the credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?  "
"war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain?"" This time he "
"have  the folk  of Gondor gather you herbs  only, when the Dark Lord gathers "
They  walked  in  single  file.  The  entrance  to  the  path  was  like  a  sort  of  arch 
"Augusta Newlan,4041371266716545,24-07-1980
"
back in dismay. 
with  the  Forest  River  filled  with  deep  waters  what  must  once  have  been  a  great 
cry came from him. He shut his eyes  and clung to the horse's mane. The wind 
"Rauros many days back, and intended then to go straight to your city, if you  "
Prince and his blue banner at their head. 
drawing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur of the Mountain that was flung out 
"to  either  side.  As  Gandalf  had  hoped,  the  goblin  army  had  gathered  behind  the "
"stood  up to his full height, craning his neck eastward and  southward.  For "
 
and upon the  quay  beside a  great  grey horse stood a  figure robed all in 
"All  the  others  laughed  too.  After  all  they  had  lost  a  good  deal,  but  they  had "
"     When all was done Faramir led them to a recess at the back of the cave, "
by its light they explored the cave from end to end. 
"distant  lands,  and  in  this  neighbourhood  heroes  are  scarce,  or  simply  lot  to  be "
"Elena Goodredge,4322413230388,13-07-1998
"
"and his  brother  were  trampled  to death  when they assailed the  mymakil, "
errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!' 
"####-through by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they "
cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they know him  now.  For the 
for they hid themselves in fear and would not come forth until  the  day was 
feared that  a song or some poetry was now imminent;  and they  were getting 
"was  that dwelt  in the lake, it had  seized  on Frodo  first among  all the "
"of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not "
####-There was no hope of any more. 
"Rabi Santori,4717976746685640,28-08-1977
"
"     'Maybe.  To  sheep  other sheep no  doubt  appear  different,'  laughed "
"Gandalf's absence, I mean?' asked Frodo. "
""
"     ` ""Are the Men of  Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? "" I said to "
"insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would pine, "
Riders comes? And  other armies will  come.  I  am too late. All is lost.  I 
"passed  slowly  and wearily.  Dawn was growing in the sky, and the  dell was "
"that  shot  the  dragon  with  his  bow.  Bard  is  he,  of  the  race  of  Dale,  of  the  line  of "
"only in everybody's way,' he stammered; 'but  I should like to do anything I "
"part  in  friendship.  You, and  Master  Samwise,  too,  I  guess have  some "
"coming to us, mark my words!' "
     They were like great figures seated upon thrones. Each had three joined 
And the rivers golden run. 
     'Old fool!' he  said. 'Old fool! This is my hour. Do you not know Death 
"taken from them by the wood-elves, and the great sword Orcrist too. Bilbo had his "
you to tell me  whether I now speak nearer the  mark. But if you  will trust  
"goes  on myself, so I cannot explain it  to  you. Some of us are  still true "
"the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic "
"White Downs, they came to the Far Downs,  and to the Towers,  and  looked on "
the  dark  water.  At once the Mirror  cleared  and  he  saw  a twilit land. 
"     'Wicked masster!' it hissed. 'Wicked masster cheats us; cheats Smjagol, "
"Pauline Dudman,4421474156306326,14-09-1976
"
"very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and "
"he still had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and  hungry, and it is not to "
"     'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn. "
"Theresita Campagne,4041379370455,20-01-1999
"
"had got  it  ready, he cast  into  the darkness ahead and as high as he could  throw  it. "
being  shut  in  a  place  from  which  the  only  way  out  led  through  the  dragon's  lair 
"the orcs,  but the  time lay behind  them like an ever -darkening  dream. All "
"floors  under  the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas,  gems  and crystals and  "
"Jana Lille,4041596912840,01-12-1996
"
"Darkness came down quickly,  as they  plodded slowly  downhill and up again, "
"     behind them stood taller shapes of  grey, and  behind  those again were "
words to spare for strangers. 
"and there was crowned  by  a battlement; so that those in the Citadel might, "
""
""
soon what I have found.' 
"fruitless, though it may have been thank less.' "
"house, looking on the fair  face  of Faramir, wept, for all the people loved "
"Germayne Kuhnwald,4041370800989154,03-09-2000
"
"Hillier Bortoli,4041590242350,10-11-1989
"
treasure.' 
""
     He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the  gar dens 
"to death. When we leave here, where  there are still a few trees and bushes,  "
country that the  crawling day now  slowly  unveiled  to his shrinking eyes.  
beard stood out stiff as a great besom. 
     Now all roads were running together to  the  East to meet the coming of 
"     'Your fi ngers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped "
"be too  sad, Sam. You cannot be always torn in two. You will  have to be one "
goblins  chained  their  hands  behind  their  backs  and  linked  them  all  together  in  a 
"Dario Kleinholz,4041377106287266,05-02-1975
"
"that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf,  and  all. You can say  what you like, "
"####-tale. For a long  while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no quest ions. His "
"about, and to have a word with the chief of the dwarves. Thorin was too wretched "
"covered  with green slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and "
"or three quite different tribes  were present, and they could not understand "
"     'I am the Doorward of Thjoden,' he said. 'Hbma is my name. Here  I must  "
pale-green  and luminous and wet.  Its fingered end had ho ld of Frodo's foot  
cairn we might build.' 
I want to see Elrond. I must be off.' 
"     'You  ought to  begin to understand, Frodo,  after all you have heard,' "
two  later a rumour (probably  started by the knowledgeable Sam)  was spread 
mountain-top  in  a  spout of green  and  scarlet  flame. The dwarves heard  the  awful 
"     'Hullo, Pippin!' he said.  'So you've come on  this  little expedition, "
"####-am bound, by solemn  undertaking to the  Council, to find a way or perish in "
question once before-it   seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more 
"     Sam  looked darkly at him and shuddered again, thinking that he guessed "
"     Many times he  repeated these words in different order, or varied them. "
"Wheeler Troyes,4017950673868500,05-06-1979
"
     'What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry. 
"Eulalie Bastard,4041593583321,25-03-1985
"
####-     Pippin looked behind. The number of  the Ents had grown -- or  what was 
"Maxie Brightie,4041378965984589,25-07-1982
"
crept over the fields.  
"it rolled  again, as  if huge  hands were turning the very caverns  of Moria  "
"not by the hand of man  shall he fall, and hidden from the Wise  is the doom "
less than five years. I wonder  what happened afterwards;  but there  is  no 
"Edwin Schade,4041593232168,28-11-1979
"
since Boromir departed.  He was too great to  be subdued  to the will of the 
'Where is the Steward? And where also is Mithrandir?' 
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale! ' 
any notice of them.' 
"Kellia Ruppeli,4051398477058,01-04-1983
"
"""Dwarves!"" said Bilbo in pretended surprise. "
"Debbie Othen,4017953309862061,11-06-1989
"
     The sun was sinking  behind the long  western arm of the mounta ins when 
"about, really: to  give away lots of birthday presents,  and somehow make it  "
     That over hills were doomed to roam; 
it cannot make:  not real new things of its own. I  don't think it gave life 
Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Drea dful as the Storm and the 
but the resolve grew. `What? Me take  the Ring from him? The Council gave it 
their will waver and crumble into fear. 
"""The sons of my father's daughter,"" answered Thorin, ""Fili and Kili of the race "
the left facing them stood she whom he had called Dernhelm. But the  helm of 
and that  it was far  ahead of the battle with few men about it. Then he was 
"     'That  is  just what we should like,  too,'  said Gandalf. 'We  are not "
"was now left of the Nine Walkers, then he was  in sole command of the secret "
"Jamaal Curado,4048485580224,24-07-1991
"
worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.' 
""
small bells tinkling. 
####-and  a  nasty  smell  was  in  the  air;  but  there  was  a  good  deal  of  food  jumbled 
     until he heard on strands of pearl 
"Meriadoc,  son  of  Saradoc  is  my  name; and my  companion, who,  alas! is "
and yet live; and the Sword comes  back to war  that was broken in  the long 
"like. Hard  as di'monds, soft as moonlight. Warm as sunlight,  cold as frost  "
the  tramping  of heavy feet. Presently  a whole squad of the  ruffians came 
"Benny Matthis,4017955768320,10-01-1997
"
"Ents, the oldest living thing that still  walks  beneath the Sun  upon  this "
     `Safely! ' said Sam. `All alone and without me to help you? I  couldn't  
him;  then  with  an  effort  he  struggled  to  his feel again. He  felt  a  
"stirred,  feeling that he must break the silence:  he longed  to  shout  out "
"####-""To  me!  To  me!  Elves  and  Men!  To  me!  O  my  kinsfolk!""  he  cried,  and  his "
march. Time was when a squirrel could go from tree to tree from what  is now 
"'And, maybe,'  said Imrahil, 'the road that leads thence to  the pass  above "
deadly  earnest the servant of  a grim  master  in the  greatest  peril. The 
     'That  is Durin's Stone! ' cried Gimli. `I cannot  pass without turning 
""
touch of Bergil's hand. 
come into this dreadful  Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow! ' He 
"thief, whatever he said.' "
up and bore her after him.  But  the  men of the king's household they could 
a you-can't-have-it so-go-to-sleep!' 
"####-wild, the evening meal seemed a feast  to the hobbits:  to drink pale yellow "
"Crin Ashingden,4041375482719498,12-12-1991
"
"     'I mark them,' said Aragorn. 'But I marked also that this old man had a  "
"almost all his folk  were slain. He leaped  into the waters,  but  the  Ring "
"sun  was  not,  however,  high  enough  yet to shine down into the clearing, "
"Dan Bee,4041376209532,29-06-1993
"
"it  is  called,  for the Elves made  it long ago.  Now  let me  pass.  Come, "
"and sometimes, after  a glass or two, would  allude to the absurd adventures "
Sam.  `It'd  be nothing short  of murder  to turn  him loose with  all these 
As  a  matter  of  fact  two  nights  and  the  day  between  had  gone  by  (and  not 
"Dot Whipp,4041596142196070,20-05-1979
"
in  through  the  crack  they  had  left  and  scorched  them  as  they  lay  hid.  Flickering 
     'To  me!  To me!' cried Thjoden. 'Up Eorlingas!  Fear no darkness!' But 
"Avivah Senior,4246600368547,07-06-1977
"
supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke: 
all  the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we  should  
him. And  she said: 'Alas! if he should die. Would that there  were kings in 
     Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more. 
and his glance now strayed rather to the house than to the eastward walls. 
wished this  thing  brou ght to Minas Tirith. Alas! it is a crooked fate that 
"     At  that moment Sam felt a  tremor in the  ground  beneath  him, and he "
"drier. Great stores of goods a nd  food, and beer,  were found that had  been "
"####-They  beat  on  it,  they  thrust  and  pushed  at  it,  they  implored  it  to  move,  they "
"Ruby Dunsire,4017957188369064,02-07-1992
"
"unlightened dark, when  far  away he saw  fires spring up, across in the dim "
"Ophelie Dalmon,4041599210750380,06-10-1996
"
"was  a  young  dragon,  certainly  not  after  devouring  so  many  of  the  dwarves  and "
brok e his stick upon the stooping troll. 
"     'Go on running,' said Ugl®k. 'What do you think? Sit  on the  grass and "
hard to deal with!' 
Lothlurien. 
"that had slipped over  one  eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow came over his "
"there is a portage-way somewhere on  the western shore, if I can find it. It "
the coming of the Great Darkness. 
"desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zvram. Or  so says the "
"     They rode on  through sunset,  and slow dusk, and gathering night. When "
all things that will give it. Send out messages  to all the beasts and birds 
closer view?' 
"all underneath, he got up and strode about and muttered: "
big a family as you could wish for.' 
"come back. I wish to see the Master of your town!"" "
to sleep again. 
"""Time! Time!"" "
that  peace and  plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the  right of  all 
the Chief's Men; and when he deals with your case you can have your say. But 
"Nanete Oakly,4017951505353,08-02-1978
"
"""Until then we keep the stone,"" cried Bard. "
"     'All right, Sam,' said Frodo. 'Lead me! As long as  you've got any hope "
"     'It's tomorrow,' said Gollum, 'or this  was  tomorrow when hobbits went "
"they fail, what then? ' "
"long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards a line of low "
"""Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!"" said Gandalf. ""Don't be a fool Mr. "
before! Now we are come to the lands  where you were foaled  and every stone 
was  joined by  many others who had watched the race and the rescue from the 
"Gollum had spoken of. The  darkness  was almost complete, and they could see "
the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the 
"Rahel Wilce,4041373737958409,10-02-1989
"
"beautifully. Trust Smjagol now? Very, very good.' "
"lose  nice  master.  And he promised, master made  him promise,  to save the "
to a small patch of thick-growing hazels.  As they peered out from among the 
war and council leave me any leisure. Can you sing?' 
"and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind "
"Chucho Petrak,4041375319845466,02-07-1977
"
     Slowly he  drew out the Ring and put it  on  once more. He vanished and  
"driving-seat,  and whipped up his two stout  ponies. His  wife stood  in the "
"straight and even, going ever  up  at the  same stiff slope. The  tunnel was "
"so,  a dark shape, like a cloud and yet  not a cloud, for it moved far  more "
"Sutherlan Ferre,4041596434152864,23-04-1975
"
men spoke with mouth.' 
"days, now  that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of  Anduin.  "
"seen. By  the  afternoon they had reached the eaves of Mirkwood, and were resting "
"brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they done even so much as that, it "
"     'Now, lord,' said Gandalf, 'look out upon  your land!  Breathe the free "
"     'I am running errands for the Healers,' said Bergil.  'I cannot stay.' "
gladly.  But stop  me when  you are  weary!  Dwarves'  tongues  run  on when 
then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes 
"That,  of  course,  is  the  dangerous  part  about  caves:  you  don't  know  how  far "
"proud  eyes.  'These  are  indeed  strange days,'  he  muttered. 'Dreams and "
""
"Dana Dyos,4041595258813627,30-03-1982
"
"Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination  of Gimli, Gluin's son,  "
were  now loud and near. Sam  peered about. He had climbed right to the flat 
"Jacquelynn Colerick,4041592294250,04-01-1997
"
"did not think  that the Ring would have  any lasting effect on  you, not for "
     Chapter 4   The Siege of Gondor  
"     At length they came  to a sharp  bend. There  the road, which had  been "
"     Without haste and at peace they passed into Anurien,  and they came  to "
winter -thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.' 
"glimmering in the half light. Proud and tall he seemed, though the hair that "
"Evania Linzee,4917542337804,08-04-1992
"
back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing. 
"walked  home  under  the  early stars  through  Hobbiton and  up  the  Hill, "
N®menor. This then  is  one  choice before you. before us. We may jo in  with 
arms. 
round him. It was lucky that he had come to his senses in time. Soon he would not 
"beneath,  stabbed  down  thin  and  bright  before  them.  But  this  was  seldom,  and  it "
"among the reeds where watchers of  Gondor lay,  northwards below the infalls "
between them and the eastern wall where they had stood at dawn. 
"their packs. Presently  Sam  appeared, trotting quickly and  breathing hard; "
"'Thither I came at last, to the  uttermost foundations of stone. He was with "
     foam dyed with blood flamed a t sunset; 
Goldberry clothed all  in silver -green  with flowers in  her girdle! Is  the 
the lads go on.' 
"have turned away  from  folly and  evil, and  have been of  service. But you  "
Paths of the Dead.' 
being caught  in  the  very midst  of the great  battle that would  soon  be 
 
this Treebeard?' 
""
"quailed  in the shadow. But they were  a stern people, loyal to  their lord, "
anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper.  
knocking died away and was not heard again. 
return. Not I.  For I deem it perilous now for  mortal man  wilfully to seek  
"to do? Do you think they  will be able to cure him in Rivendell,  if we ever "
and they blinked as they entered. 
"Annabell Christon,4041376779104,16-06-2001
"
"Elissa Bullingham,4750933109684,05-03-1994
"
"Isidor Spratling,4041373192491,02-02-2001
"
little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns. 
stony slopes towards the vast fens below. They faded swiftly and softly into  
"Far off there came from  several directions  a similar  hoom, hom, hoom that "
""
"     'Our  choice then,' said Gimli, 'is either to take the  remaining  boat "
"""All  the  same,  I  should  like  it  all plain  and  clear,""  said he obstinately, putting "
all  got  up  and  prepared  to  move.  The  wind  was  howling  and  the  thunder  still 
"     'Hail,  Frodo!' he  cried. 'You  are  abroad  late. Or are  you perhaps "
"the edge of the trees,  they set off  across  the  open  as  quickly as they "
"rear!' the slave-driver shouted.  'Three files up. And stay there, or you'll "
"will, he  came slowly back to the  iron rail, leaning on it, breathing hard. "
"right road, and keep your feet from wandering.' "
"haste! I have given you my wor d to return hither with you, if a day of peace "
"Audi Boag,4041591141130,10-06-1989
"
"over the rocks and as fast as they could along the ledge to him, wondering what on "
"a  small table,  two chairs and a  bench;  but  at  either side  ther e  were "
"hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths into which he had  looked for "
"Saruman's hand, and the head  of  it fell down at Gandalf's feet. 'Go!' said "
####-     Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows 
their lord gives them leave?' 
""
"     'Well, well, now we can talk again,' said Treebeard. 'You are thirsty I "
trace or footstep branches off on either side. The Orcs must have been aware 
struggled on. 
still greater and more deadly.' His eyes flashed and his face  was lit as by 
Halbarad shall tell us.' 
"     'Nay,  lord,' said Gimli, 'but  I  can  speedily fetch it, if there  be "
"Brok Kiezler,4041592023114779,24-08-1992
"
"sheer as they went back. In the end, worn out, they  just cast themselves on "
whole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire; and  before 
"But  be it known that  I have  now sworn him to  my service, and he shall be "
"course, I  never blamed you for your welcome of me. How  could I  do so, who "
     Gandalf did not answer. 
"in shreds and  tatters. His breath was smoking, and  the darkness  was  less "
speak of  him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.' 
"     Now  at last they passed  into the high circles of the City, and in the "
"he  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  wall.  Only  Bombur  was  there,  for  it  was  his  turn to "
answered the challenge. 
"     'Then you  shall go with me,'  said the Rider. 'I will bear  you before "
"behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they  win renown, and "
"pain leave him,  and his breath grew  easy: though he was stiff and sore  to "
at once the whole lot of them came hurrying after the hobbit along the ground and 
round them.  It may have been only a  trick of  the wind in  the cracks  and 
     'Don't stop!' said Merry. 
now.' 
"final  strength was given to  him, Sam lifted Frodo with no more  difficulty "
"     `I have not the strength,' said Elrond; `neither have they.' "
"     'Come on, you slugs!' he cried.  'This is  no time  for  sl ouching.' He "
     Gandalf  halted. Snow  was  thick on  his  hood and  shoulders;  it was 
answered Gimli. 'His foresight failed him.' 
"     `All we need is something to keep a hold on him,' said Frodo. 'We  want "
"'Nor  indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, more than "
"past  eight  by  Shire  clocks, maybe. But nothing's wrong. Though  it ain't  "
"Yet he  fell into the trap, and tried to deal  with  his victims piece-meal, "
"Dance all ye joyful, now dance all together! "
"the  running  horse,  white upon green, that was the emblem of  the House of "
they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river  
"is something else there. A great  cave-troll,  I  think,  or more than  one. "
at  their fingertips. Feeling  the approach of spring. Over the stream there 
his face when the  torches reached  them; and he  set  their  shields before 
"the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the pass at the "
"Korey Ferenczy,4437676246895,27-06-1989
"
"look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a  "
"More unbearable they became, not  less, at each new cry.  At length even the "
seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light  was even clearer and  
again.  September  was  passing  and there  was  still no  news of him.  The 
"legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like an empty sack."" "
"     With that Gandalf went out;  and as he did so, there came the note of a  "
Snatches of competing songs came  from the bathroom mixed  with the sound 
grew many willow-trees. Already in this southern land they were blushing red 
so they rode proudly at the head of  the sin ng  company with beating hearts 
"dreamed  that  the floor of  the cave was giving way, and he was slipping-beginning "
back!' 
"     'No, nor hobbits,' said Pippin. 'And I don't like the thought of trying "
"have  nearly fallen asleep on guard,' he thought. `I  was on  the edge  of a "
"Yorke Uff,4017958572774166,31-10-1993
"
grave?  
"Philis Gabbott,4450017931778,14-05-1975
"
stomach.' 
At once there was great  jostling  and  cursing as  each troop  tried to get 
"seemed to him, when at last he slowly raised his head, there was a pale white glint, "
"side, not noticing that many  of the Riders smiled to see  the two together: "
and wishing he was beside the wizard on his tall horse. He had gone just inside the 
"Whistles  blew,  armour  clashed,  swords  rattled,  goblins  cursed  and  swore  and "
"upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to "
"befell would not trouble us, being dead.' "
"pipe. He was  blowing  the most  enormous  smoke-rings, and wherever he  told one "
mincing  them.  They  had  to  hear  Bilbo's  account  of  what  had  happened  to  him 
than I  did. Anyway  it's  too  late  now; and really I think it's much more 
"slower, great waggons with fair housings of many colours, drawn by oxen; and "
"does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there.  Who made  the track, "
one  of the great among us makes himself master and puts down the others. In 
"still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori,  Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur "
"Walker Barkhouse,4173189222390746,09-11-1999
"
stepped inside the dark door. 'Sam!' he called. 'Sam! Time!' 
"counsel in peril, and made  use of the  speed of Shadowfax. Your  own valour "
"of some power that had no longer  any use for snow, since they had retreated "
"as  it  was  full  dark,  he  went  to  a  corner  of  an  inner  chamber  just  within  the  gate "
"     'Ah,'  said  Ted, 'you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside-tales "
"####-Oliphaunts, and I have seen one.  What a life! But no one  at home will ever  "
"""One  left,  yes. One  right,  yes. Two  right,  yes,  yes. Two  left,  yes,  yes."" And so "
""
"of trees, and the horizon was veiled. "
Isengard  must  be  emptied;  and Saruman has  armed the  wild  hillmen  and 
"     'I'll get there, if  I leave everything but my bones behind,' said Sam. "
"some  were  leaning, some were  fallen,  some cracked or broken; they looked "
"forgotten  in what direction  the path  lay,  and  they were  all hopelessly  lost,  at  least "
"behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy  birds were piping and wa iling, "
the end of this tale we will say no more about it just now.  
"the  City,  and  they said that there was a  riding of fair folk out of  the "
"     'Only one thing  is clear to me,' said Otho, 'and that  is that you are "
"could  not get a grip on it, or make a crack in  it; and they  were bruising "
"cheerless as  a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a  fire. In "
"squirrels,  and even birds, got out of his way as quick as  lightning  if  they saw him "
brown-green  buds.  About them  lay long launds of green  grass dappled with 
They did not dare to follow the river much further to. wards the Gate; but they 
gate and past the great seated figures with their glittering eyes. There was 
####-Bilbo was saved by pure luck. For that of course was the answer.  
"are  rather  in need of help, or  at  least  advice.  I may  say we have had  rather  a bad "
"Thjoden turned to the Wild Man.   'We will receive your offer,' he said.  'For  "
"     'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'these doors are probably  governed by words. Some "
"deathly white;  and a cold  fury rose in him, so that  all speech failed him "
"Feliks Ferroni,4194150583190,14-07-1996
"
"their  way in,  he  left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the "
"in a dark hour; but always too few, always less than hope looked for or need "
"precious? No,  he  doesn't.  But Smjagol  can  bear things.  Yes.  He's been "
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a  light flashed from the staff that he 
"     The eastern faces of the Ephel D®ath  were  sheer, falling in cliff and "
"Reeva Baugham,4041594406616339,15-08-1998
"
and released the prisoners from  the Lockholes. One  of the first  that they 
"the ends of worms and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry, bare, sandy hole with nothing "
and before  them  came  walking slow the Lord Aragorn. He was  clad in black  
misgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing). 
"him, pale in the moonlight. "
""
"overwhelming  force  upon  the Mountain.  At his  summons,  wheeling with  a  "
"Great Goblin as he stood dumbfounded in the middle of his rage. He fell dead, and "
"     I'll look for thee, and call to thee; I'll come to thee again! "
""
"fair price. They had  to work harder in Bree, but  Bob treated them well; so "
nothing could be seen. 
his  mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself has not yet entered 
"Francisca Kubanek,4565323994812,08-12-1998
"
remember. The Rangers have returned. We came back with them.  And there is 
 
"iron-shod feet, and upon the road there rang the swift clatter of hoofs. "
     Chapter 9   Flotsam and Jetsam   
"""if  he  leads  all  the Wargs  and  the  goblins  down  here? We  shall  all  be  caught  and "
scrawny neck was  lolling from side to side as if he was listening. His pale 
"fume. And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of "
Muil to the Forest.  The others  nodded as the various points were fitted in 
"Regen Weale,4041599828944,25-03-1993
"
"Pierre Francillo,4041373520626,31-01-2001
"
"listening  with all  his  ears, peering into the dense shadows of  the rocks "
in Bree after that name. 
"long enough.  Since they falter no longer, it seems, may I not  now spend my "
resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not fit it to the 
"heart  of the ancient realm  as it  was long ago, and here is the  mound  of "
 
"     As for Bilbo Baggins,  even while he was making his speech, he had been "
"blurring shadow shrouded the stony world  about them. They passed on, "
"Carlina Caldicot,4472056153734,09-11-1995
"
"an  age of the world had gone by,  yet to the trees and the grass it is less "
listened. 
"     that drowned before the Days began, "
"Going  to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. 'You shall come with me "
"Laurie Warsop,4041372451179,18-05-1986
"
     'Not he!' said Pippin. 'He was probably  choking and  not laughing  any 
shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded  by Saruman. Many 
"on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on "
"Jerri Halliberton,4041596479774275,18-12-1998
"
"I  am  old  and  strong,  strong  strong.  Thief  in  the  Shadows!""  he  gloated.  ""My "
     As Beren looked into her eyes 
"     `But He'll see, He'll know. He'll take it from us! ' "
"     Then the  Lady unbraided  one  of her long tresses, and  cut o ff  three "
Gandalf was  not there.  Gloom settled  still  more  heavily  on Pippin.  He 
""
""
""
"now, just when we shall need him most  --  that is, if he's ever going  to be "
"above. The air was warm. The sound of running  and falling  water  was loud, "
was greater. Their ears were strained  for the sound of hoof or  foot on the 
"It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting. "
"he was not  in a barrel himself, nor was  there anyone  to pack him  in, even  if  there "
"     'I greet you,'  he said,  'and maybe you look for welcome. But truth to "
"before their eyes,  and it seemed  to  them in a moment of  silence that the "
"""Very  comforting  you  are  to  be  sure,""  growled  Thorin.  ""Good-bye!  If  you "
"Adaline Quinet,4041596237916713,17-06-1994
"
but they could not see far because of  the many windings and rollings of the  
Leastways  that is how it started. But now I reckon it's his Men that has it 
"     ever, to Arnach, to his own country "
he says. Whither were you leading him? ' Gollum made no reply. 
windings  out of  the woods  below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In 
bare. Upon it at a sign from Denethor they laid Faramir  and his father side 
saw  that  in  this place  there were many  stones  lying  in what appeared  to be  a now 
"trail of drippings that he left wherever he went or sat; and also he began to snivel, "
"     'We must make for  the  Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a  "
"won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave "
incantation.  Then a wild thought  of escape came to him. He wondered if  he 
     Into the shining pool. 
"Christiane Rowntree,4528433205183633,10-01-1977
"
"some way ou t.  He thought  of himself running free  over the grass, grieving "
Holbytla!' he cried; and at length Merry came out of  deep dreams and sat up 
"sound of them sank deep into his  heart.  Beside him stood Merry and Pippin, "
"     There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother, greatest of  "
"passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind. "
"long he had possessed it. So I set a wa tch for  him, guessing that he  would "
"     'A safer seat than many, I guess,' said Legolas. 'Yet doubtless Gandalf "
     The chamber was  filled with a  soft  light; its walls were  green  and 
there was Farmer Cotton standing all alone warming his hands. 
"asked. The  men of  Ringlu  Vale  behind the  son  of  their  lord, Dervorin "
"     `What  did  you see?  '  said Pippin to Sam, but  Sam was  too deep  in "
"welling up before them. The  river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily "
"before  the Big  People,  and saw  the  little People arriving.  He was here "
####-follow their own advice. Bilbo left  his place and went and stood on a chair 
"     Frodo looked up at the Elf  standing tall above him, as he  gazed  into "
sang 
his  footing  on  a  round  stone  and  fell  into  the  cold  water  with  a  splash.  He  had 
"elven-tower, curtained with threaded  jewels  of silver and  gold, and ruby, "
bleating in flocks. Green  walls and white walls rose. There were fortresses 
"Elves with reverence, and this even more than his courtesy, and his food and  "
"here alone in the world was found Moria -silver, or true-silver as some  have "
"They left you the message, because they could not wait."" "
"Saruman  done  to me and all  this land,' he said; 'and  I will remember it, "
really must wait  till the  morning.  I'll  be as curious as you  like after  
"for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.' "
"Mirror  of Galadriel,'  she said.  'I have  brought you here so that you may "
here; and it seems to me that he is  perhaps  not so alone and singular as I 
"eager. He did not want information only: he wanted you,  quickly, so that he "
"Wallie Harsnipe,4237795134604,29-11-1983
"
"     'Well, I am going back into the  open air, to see what the wind and sky "
"If I cannot undo their work,  hear me at least in  this, lord! One who knows "
"Dena Ivanyukov,4017950361451,02-04-1984
"
"dangerous than anything you  will  ever meet,  unless you are  brought alive "
"as  through a tall window, could be seen of the great valley in the gloaming "
take cover  in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road 
"Vanya Cato,4041590849196,21-02-1992
"
"Andris O'Sherin,4041371341082,26-08-1978
"
"Kristopher Houten,4041379861287234,11-12-1977
"
the night flowed over him like a roaring wind. 
morning.  About  midnight carriages  came for the important folk. One by one 
northern marches and the Gap of Rohan. 
What we did in the War of the Ring. 
called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried. 
"""I'm  awfully  sorry,""  said Bilbo,  ""but  I  have  come without my  hat,  and  I  have "
 
seas  on the  dark  heads of the hills in fine  drenching rain. By nightfall 
cast aside  upon the seat. He turned his tired  gaze away from  the darkling 
"Kinsley Rumens,4041372954762163,21-06-1991
"
"still  the great bats  swirled  about  the heads  and  ears of  elves  and men, or  fastened "
"must follow the Orcs, if there is hope  that  any of our Company are  living "
""
remained.  But alone  it could do nothing but see small images of things far 
"swept  away, hewn down,  or cast over the Rock into the stony stream  below.  "
"One, I've heard, and I hope it's true!' "
climbs backwards-like. And anyway I'd better follow these lights.' 
"Isengard,  and the West is no longer safe. It is  as Gandalf feared: by some "
"     Jomer was silent for a  moment,  then he  spoke. 'We both have need  of "
"Alric Puncher,4017951563188,28-12-1981
"
"the skirts  of the White Mountains,  and crossed the Isen  and the Greyflood  "
may a man  come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be 
"     `Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As "
"had many friends of old. And  the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide, "
"on  his  ring,  and warned  by  the  echoes  to  take more  than hobbit's care to make no "
"the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend themselves, "
"Sherie Trewinnard,4041376297738590,03-11-1994
"
down suddenly into the lowlands. Far to the west in a haze lay the meres and 
"southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must  have climbed from the "
on the ground; and  he struck him with his staff. 'Turn about! If these fine 
     It was the day  before Midsummer  when messengers came from Amon D(n 
"     Many  houses  there  were,  chambers,  halls,  and  passages,  cut  and "
"dark plain below came the crying  of fell voices, and  the  howling of  many  "
lifted Bilbo in his arms. 
"""I shall be angry  if  the old slowcoach  is  late,"" said another. ""I have no wish  to "
"rise the  roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there "
with hardly any more noise than bats. 
he began reckoning the distance to the Iron Hills and how long it would be before 
"and curses; shrieking and skriking, that followed were beyond description. Several "
"Shelia Brettelle,4041599131562,13-02-1990
"
"and my  things. I lay  here  terrified. And then all  went deadly quiet, and "
"longer climbing, but the  ground  was now more broken  and  dangerous in the "
"and more learned, and invented their magic and their cunning craft, in the making "
"""If you mean you think it is my job to go into the secret passage first, O Thorin "
"Korey Prene,4017953653680,28-12-1978
"
to  words  not  meant for  them: ill-mannered  children  or  stupid servants 
strange portents here  of late. But pass  on now  quickly! For  the  Lord of 
 
"Helm's Deep  had  begun, but  no  sound  or challenge  was heard within;  no "
     'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start before 
Then  suddenly  a  great  light  appeared  in  the  low  place  in  the  hills  and  the 
"     `No,  I'll  leave that  to  you,  Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But-well. I "
"     'Come on, Sam!  ' he said, `or you'll be too late  again.' He  loosened "
sunshine. In the  distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley 
fastened about the neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver. 
he  passed through a narrow gate in the wall. 'May you bring good counsel to 
"Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the  "
"     There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than "
"Donna Benedyktowicz,4041374975654,03-01-1993
"
"Lotho is hiding? You know, don't you, Worm? Will you tell them?' "
that glittered  as it  turned:  the  last rays of the moon  were now  falling 
""
"     'I find it quite  easy to  believe,' said Merry.  'But you haven't  got "
"     'No,' said Merry. 'Well, no, I don't think so. But I can't use my right "
Mountain rising out of  steep slopes of  sombre  pines. Dividing the  upland 
get  out  of  him  for  a  long  time.  So  they  took  him  and  laid  him  out  of  the way  on 
"the  town,  and  voices  hailed  the  raft-steerers. Then  ropes were  cast  and oars were "
"     The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the  top of  the "
"Caryl Pladen,4041370454602681,22-05-1979
"
"far,  I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape.  They "
"numbers will be enough, if in the end it must come to unhappy blows."" "
look too  far ahead. Let us be glad that  the first stage is safely over.  I 
"goodly  men, pale-skinned, dark of hair, with  grey eyes and  faces sad  and "
"come  very soon. For  about this time of the year, when the  leaves are gold "
"that  stuck  out  further  than  the  brim  of  his  shady  hat.  ""What  do  you  mean?""  be "
"much slower on foot, not  on the roads that I mean to take.  I was  going to "
very heavy.' Pippin's voice fell very low as if he was talking to h imself.  
"of  the  version  Bilbo  first  gave  to  his  friends,  and  actually  set  down  in  his  diary. "
"themselves, can they? O no indeed. There's the tunnel coming.  Smjagol  must  "
house at a time. Now he had got fifteen strangers sitting in his porch! 
"""Help!""  he  shouted,  and Balin was  just  in  time  to  seize  the  boat  before  it  floated "
"Elden Fair,4041595117559841,19-06-1986
"
"secret for so many years. As he  stepped  down he slipped it on his  finger, "
"     'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good "
"swung his dangling  legs and  looked at  the  flowers  in  the garden, wondering what "
enemies. Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel. 
"racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.' "
meet again in my house! There  you shall sit beside me and tell  me all that 
     'Revenge?' said Frodo. 'Revenge for what? I still don't understand what 
"upon  Amon Hen,  that were made in the  days of the great  kings? I at least "
     The finest rockets ever seen: 
"Crawl ing  under  its shadow the road  went on,  and rounding it sprang  east  "
"for years  - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded "
"     'I didn't  mean  that,'  said  Sam.  'I  mean:  if it's  poisonous,  or  "
forget anything important: I am not going into details:  the  whips and  the 
to me.  He said he was sorry he  had never had a chance of talking herb-lore 
"     'I can't go all the way at a run, Sam,' said Frodo with a wry smile. 'I  "
"the world beyond Lothlurien, unless maybe in  Rivendell, that we dare not by "
"tip-tap,  squeak:  the  noise  was  like  branches  fretting  in  the  wind, "
"stand firmly, and soon they would all be overpowered like weary flies. Already the "
"chance, you and me'll slip  off  and set up somewhere on our  own with a few "
""
     'What's the matter?' asked Merry. 'Are you lying on an ant-hill?' 
"     'Very good,' said Frodo. 'You make the arrangements.' "
"     The next day came with a morning like  a brown  dusk, and the hearts of "
"It  was  a  terrible  battle.  The  most  dreadful  of  all  Bilbo's  experiences,  and  the "
"     'Don't  take  names to  yourself,  Smjagol,'  said Frodo. 'It's  unwise "
     A sudden light broke on Frodo. 'Sharkey!' he cried. 
They passed through the ruined chamber. Tables were rotting there; chairs and 
"     As the evening drew on, Frodo  woke up again, and he found  that  he no "
fully. Behold! you  are  come into  a peril  greater  even  than the wit  of 
stars. And the last king of the line of Anbrion had no heir. 
and turn it where I  would-to look across the wide seas of water and of time 
"Wendi Rubega,4469384698203571,24-08-1976
"
"hold of Dori's legs, as Dori was borne off last of all; and they went together above "
came  the  howl  of  hunting wolves  and  the  cries  of  goblins.  Still  the  next morning 
     By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). He 
"Rufe Dunckley,4017955208733301,01-11-1978
"
Who are they? ' 
but  they hoped  in  this way to  escape the notice of unfriendly  eyes. The 
"     He  drew his sword again and  beat on the stone with the  hilt, but  it "
great slab of white stone. 
"memory never fade!"" "
"smaller bowls, not for the butler's great flagons. "
Inside Information 
"####-shame. How comes  it  that you  can  endure such company? For you are proud, "
"cowered or drowsed uneasily in some hiding beside the road, they heard cries "
"""Looking for food and drink, because we were starving."" "
"     'I feel  the air is stuffy,' said the Dwarf. 'This wood is lighter than "
rest. For a while  they sat without speaking  under the shadow of a mound of 
that Frodo could see. `Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want 
####-weapons down and sued for mercy. 
"     Bree was the chief village of  the Bree-land, a small inhabited region, "
"     'Yes, the skulking fellow that  we saw with his  nose in  the pool down "
"Paddy Toyer,4017950010546,03-03-1992
"
you spare me  a moment?  I want your help in  something urgent.  Elrond says 
"Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that  way,  then above  all they should not "
"creeping  thing,  and out of  my path!  Your time is at an  end.  You cannot "
"western lands, and especially  in these latter years, to  save you from  the "
"pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin  limbs  splayed "
"trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo  had ever seen or imagined. "
with  bell-shaped  tops made of  straw. The noise of  the giant bees  flying  to and  fro 
having special interest  in discovering the kinship with the language of the 
wanted.' 
"pretty.  Watch out tonight! And you,  Sammie, don't  go ill-treating my poor  "
Captain Faramir may say.' 
"matter-one  fourteenth share,  to be precise, according  to a  letter, which  fortunately "
"were softer underneath, especially in the region of the–er–chest; but doubtless one "
"     Ugl®k's words were enough, apparently, to satisfy  the Isengarders; but "
"they were going to, and where they were coming from; but he got little more news "
"If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!' "
"from the  hall.  On  the green  there waited,  still and silent, the  hooded "
"     'Several things,' a nswered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.' "
"Lotti Haith,4017955455944,06-10-1994
"
"memory  of the  fear  and  the darkness troubles you,'  she said, 'this will "
     'Almost felt you liked the  Forest! That's good! That's uncommonly kind 
hacking  him  to pieces. He listened; and as he did  a gleam of hope came to  
 
"climbed  the  high  bank.  After  going  a  short  way  they  struck  the  old  road,  and "
"Woody Tandy,4041595120466034,14-11-1993
"
     And Jomer said: 'Kings of  old would  have laden you  with gifts that a  
""
far.' 
left the washing up  for Lobelia.  Pippin  and Sam  strapped  up their three 
puckered eyes into the gloom. 
"####-thrust them out into the flowing stream, and  the rippling waters bore  them "
     and dauntless then with burning brow 
""
bent his bow for  the  last  time. Suddenly out of  the dark something fluttered  to his 
That is what had happened to Bert and Tom and William. 
"     'Come along!' said Merry, recognizing one of the hobbits. 'If you don't "
breath. 
"step, and sat down rubbing their legs  and knees. They were in  a  deep dark "
steps 
like a black bar of rugged clouds floating above a dangerous fog-bound sea. 
"gap  in the circle a great  dark wolf-shape  could be seen halted, gazing at "
"naught that  is not  well known to  me, who am  master of  the lore of  this "
"won't come,  if you  don't keep civil. Up to the top,  I  say. He'll be safe "
"     Beregond laughed. 'At the table small men may  do the greater deeds, we "
"the same stuff, so that when he got up he fell over.  "
those pine-woods up there.' He pointed away far up the side of  Rivendell to  
"     But  Gollum  was in  a  pitiable state, and  Frodo's  threat  had quite "
"Katuscha Baldick,4041597654110,12-10-1998
"
"our time is at hand: the world of Men, which  we must rule. But we must have "
For this House has become to me of all dwellings  the most blessed.' And she 
mouth  of despair suddenly filled  all his mind. His head whirled as  with a  
below.  
leads to a  secret way that goes beneath the mountain to some forgotten end.  
"Feasts, he beheld the beauty of  the ladies that he  saw and was filled with "
""
and inside  was  the colour of  cream. Gimli took  up one  of  the cakes and 
""
deadly  chill  was spreading  from  his  shoulder to  his arm  and side. His 
"     'I will tell you the tale of Tin®viel,' said  Strider,  'in br ief - for "
"####-more than built imitations of smials, thatched with dry  grass or  straw, or  "
and wound into the wood. 
     At  nightfall  he  brought  them to his ent-house:  nothing more than a  
shadow took shape again in Mirkwood. 
was low. Frodo looked  up at the sky. Suddenly  he saw or felt a shadow  pass 
"clustering in her out-thrust head. Great horns she had, and behind her short "
"Quite  apart  from  the  stones  no  spider  has  ever  liked  being  called  Attercop,  and "
"     There  was a sound  of soft laughter over their heads, and then another  "
     He  had not far to go.  The  tunnel was some way  behind;  the  Cleft a  
"Immanuel Gatman,4017950393231,29-01-1996
"
free?' asked Gimli. 
"     'Neither  shall  we,'  said Aragorn. 'If this be  jest, then it is  too "
"was passing in his mind. He sighed, hoisted his pack, and prepared to go out "
talons  tore  at  goblin  faces.  Other  birds  flew  to  the  tree-tops  and  seized  the 
sight  of  queer  gnarled  and knobbly  faces that gloomed dark against  the 
"company, for he  stank. For my part I hope never to look upon him again; but "
great unquiet and coming death.' 
He put his left hand in his pocket. The ring felt very cold as it quietly slipped on to 
had come to ask something hard and horrible. This is what he said: 
"     `Frodo, Mr. Frodo! ' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone!  It's  your "
"     'And  anyway all these notions  are only a trick,' he said  to himself. "
"     He  was  wakened by  a  man  shaking him.  'Wake up,  wake  up.  Master "
back way  and came  in  again by  the gate. Hobbits give   presents  to other  
not know whether  the Orcs were bringing any  prisoners or not. And  he does 
"the Master's  words,  and  of  Dale  rebuilt,  and  filled  with  golden  bells,  if  he  could "
in deep tapestries the hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue 
"Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords,  she's after meat. She  doesn't eat "
he was king:  the  lord  of a  fell  people. And lo! even  as he  laughed at 
"ea se my heart, if while the Sun yet shines, I  could see you  still. For you  "
####-     When the day came the mood of the world about them had become soft  and 
"     'His arm has grown long,' said Gandalf. "
""
he said to Gandalf: 'At  last I  understand why we  have waited! This is the 
"'Go to the armouries of the Citadel,' he said, 'and get you there the livery "
"chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick "
"glad,  my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now  heart and limb!  "
ships. But  they were all  shouting  corsairs and wouldn't listen to me. How 
"the back-door, yes. Here's the passage!"" "
"     'It was deep night. We lay  on  top of a pile  of stone,  and could see "
"leagues  north from the bridge now.  Even if  all goes  well, I could hardly "
     They passed the Door  and walked on down the steep winding  road. Light 
"they drew breath, and then they clutched at their  hearts.  Perching  now on "
####-     'Would you have my plain answer?' he said. 
"     'There, I'll be  an orc  no more,' he  cried, 'and  I'll bear no weapon "
 
     Thjoden  King of  the  Mark  had reached the road from the Gate to  the 
"He felt  that  he had only to  slip  it on, and then he  would  be safe. The "
"of  the events  at Henneth  Annyn, Pippin became aware that  Gandalf's hands "
hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than hobbits happy and 
thickly at the  breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping 
"depart, either south or west. 'Come, Gimli!' said Legolas. 'Now by Fangorn's "
valour; and  last the  captain  of the Guard brought to him  Beregond  to be 
"""You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the Mountain,"" said "
many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than 
-- so I can't tell you what I mean. It ought to  be sung. You'd have  to get 
guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors  out of deep 
"     'We  shall see,' said Jomer. 'So many strange things  have chanced that "
"arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they chose, and round "
laden with as much  of their baggage as  they  had the heart to give it; but 
     There was Gildor  and  many fair Elven folk; and there  to Sam's wonder  
that went  quickly down before them. Presently  it  brought them to a  small 
     'Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs 
great speed. 
"and drew from his bundle a rope, and also the Arkenstone wrapped in a rag. Then "
the King of the  Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a  
deep and far. Even now will you not listen to my counsel?' 
     Caveyard! Paveyard! 
"Merry! How glad  I am to see you again!  But  you are worn out, and  I won't "
"     Sam drew a deep breath. There was a path, but how he was to get  up the "
"Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all but yours "
Sauron to others.  
sons 
to sounds in the Night far away. 
"again, you'll be sorry for it.' "
"choice  is right;  and though all the mighty elf-friends of  old, Hador, and "
"Rudolf Basten,4749235946942,03-12-1999
"
"only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he "
"     'Yes,'  said Pippin  sadly, 'we did. He  was a great friend, and he was "
"     There  had been the first  ride at terrible speed without  a  halt, and "
     'We do not and we never have.'  said Jomer  with  a flash  of his eyes; 
"     A light kindled in the sky, a blaze of yellow fire behind dark barriers "
"""Who are you, and of what would you parley?"" "
"braided hair gleaming  in the twilight,  yet she wore a helm and was clad to "
"dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I  hope so. Though I feel somehow "
 
"all fears,  and his house was  crowded.  For a while  out of politeness  the "
"     The hobbits  were silent for some time. They  felt, oddly  enough, safe "
""
you shall judge him.' 
helms. Some of the swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.  
"But if you hear news up in your pleasant land,  in the Shire,  send me word!  "
"must understand that  --  Elrond  and the Council, and  the  great Lords and "
"     'Go back!' he cried. 'Go  back to  the Land of Mordor, and follow me no "
     `And why do you call him D®nadan?' asked Frodo. 
"""They  have  come!""  called  Balin.  ""And  their  camp  is  very  great.  They  must "
     'Our King and the White Rider!' they shouted. 'Forth Eorlingas!' 
"good, take care of yourselves-and DON'T LEAVE THE PATH!"" "
"birds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all "
"     And so at length Jomer and Aragorn met in  the midst of the battle, and "
"to show his quality! Ha!'  He stood up,  very tall and stern, his  grey eyes "
"without  cause  as  we  journeyed  back  to  our  own  land,""  answered  Thorin.  ""But "
"     `No, before  breakfast,' said Sam. `But  if  you're short of sleep cold "
canopy of the  tree.  Frodo and Sam drank a  little water and ate some bread 
the  deathly house. 'Poor Faramir!' he thought.  'I must find Gandalf.  Poor 
"Jae Piddington,4017953992027691,06-08-1993
"
"Gretna Lafflina,4017957273212,05-06-1987
"
'The Red  Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my years! Has it indeed 
"go where my  heart dwells, far  in the North I would now be wandering in the "
"Lorette Griffitt,4041377566872,16-05-1995
"
     As should be a -lyin' in graveyard. 
"     'But,' said  Sam, and tears started  in his eyes, 'I  thought  you were "
"Guesthouse, a large building of grey weathered stone with  two wings running "
be  done  with  it.  Mr.  Lucky  Number?  I  am  pleased  to  hear  that  you  had  other 
####-But  even  the  wild  Wargs  (for  so  the  evil  wolves  over  the  Edge  of  the  Wild 
"Concettina McNaught,4017957631278,23-03-1982
"
"Otes Holtham,4041598442846,09-01-1999
"
"Carmita Trevorrow,4017951721139274,04-07-1993
"
"Frodo and Sam crawled  after him, until  they came to a wide almost circular "
"lots of goods? Or do you always call six a troop?"" "
"Hans Inman,4089385301480241,08-05-1998
"
faith.' 
"borrow Thorin's map  and  gaze  at  it,  pondering over  the  runes and  the message of "
the one. `We don't want Shelob on us.' 
'That's what it is. It's that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And to think tha t I 
"the Morannon from the north-west, even as Frodo had done. "
"     'I  know,' said  Frodo. 'But all the same,' he added with  a shamefaced "
     Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander? 
"moved to a clump of trees, and though it was drier under them, the wind shook the "
"Redd Geator,4548532319039,01-07-1988
"
back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to 
points 
"faint, but it reminded them of  the smell of a distant wood borne  from afar "
"come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of "
On silver necklaces they strung 
of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from 
stop us! ' 
"     'Each palantnr replied to each, but all those in Gondor were  ever open "
before  the gates of Mordor. Not that there was great hope in such a course. 
     Frodo stopped and  sat down on a stone. They had now climbed up  to the 
can  Gandalf  and  the  dwarves  have  got  to?  I  only  hope  to  goodness  they  are  not 
along at a great speed stooping low with their hands almost on the ground. 
"alone  above the ruined gates before  the host of  his  enemies, that many of "
"beg, not until it is plain tha t there is no other way.' "
"     Pippin  subsided; but  Sam was not  daunted, and he  still eyed Strider  "
"lamented.  ""What  a mess we  are  in  now! We!  I  only wish  it was we:  it  is  horrible "
     Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house. 
"     Taking  his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their "
and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and tall  she was in her  
"found thus that our fears  were  true:  he was none other than  Sauron,  our "
"opening, the tunnel's end, at last it was before them. Panting, yearning for  "
"     '""Wherever  I have been, I am back,""  he answered in the genuine Gandalf "
"     He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes "
"following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a  great "
between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us. 
thief nor tracker. I  need your Ring: that you know now; but  I give  you my  
"     'Well,  we  have no time to ponder riddles,' said  Gimli. 'Let us  bear "
and 
"faces,  and laughter, and wholesome food in  quiet  days now far away. For a "
"     'We understand it all perfectly now,' said Gimli. "
"corner of the house, waving his arms as if he was warding off the rain  - and "
"     'It is a pity that our  friends lie in between,' said Gimli. 'If no land "
####- 
crawling.' 
their  voices.  The guests  became  suddenly aware  that  they were  singing 
There  was battle far above  in  the high spaces of the  air. The  billowing 
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully  anxious about him. What are we 
"fields came footmen of Harad with horsemen before them, and behind them "
"Denethor, found upon the stricken field. "
that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!' 
"and all. You'll find the Ring very dangerous now, and very hard to bear.  If "
go till the reports come back. 
"""Whatever  it  is,  it's my own, my good  elves. But  if you wish  ever  to get back "
"done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll "
yet  beheld  it.  But  deep  in  the  hearts  of  a ll  my  kindred lies  the 
falling steeply in an ever -widening trough towards the Anduin. At its bottom 
     They turned  away and went down into a  stony hollow. The westering sun 
With luck we might gel a considerable start.' 
"hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to  the ground; the elvish arrow "
do: my own son is one of them.' 
"####-before are lost in the mist of time.  Now  they  call this land their  home, "
The Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the lop  
"of Lamedon, had the heart to abide us; and Aragorn bade  him gather his folk "
"there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with our victory  the  war "
"     Suddenly,  with startling agility and  speed, straight  off  the ground "
The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it. 
is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.' 
"     'Garn!  You missed him,' said the  tracker. 'First you shoot wild, then "
""
"hundreds of feet, on to a wide shelf. A cliff was on their  left and a chasm "
"     'They'll wait for the Sun, curse them!' growled one of the guards. 'Why "
"Silvia Eicke,4041371119405,12-01-1982
"
"Alonzo Densell,4747738851916,19-07-1982
"
of hardihood  and swift  judgement in the field. But such is  Faramir.  Less 
far  from  the eaves of the forest. And the people  were  troubled in  their 
""
yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?' 
"Daffi Ferries,4017951950641,03-05-1993
"
one another. He could no longer find any words to say;  and he turned to his 
"honey,  and twice-baked cakes that would keep good a long time, and on a little of "
"to the ground, and then began to crawl towards him. "
     The darkness dwells in Durin's halls 
"Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.' "
a loss. 
fierce. 
""
"     Treebeard  was immediately  aware  of him. 'Hm, ha, hey, my Pippin!' he "
"grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over him, as if the "
"prepared to follow him,  he laid his hand  upon the  tree beside the ladder: "
"Dorri Bras,4041598490127772,19-04-1987
"
     'They tried to pierce your heart with a  Morgul-knife  which remains in 
"other  side they  saw  the River like  a ribbon  laid down to Pelargir,  and "
"dreams. Dream-dinners aren't any good, and we can't share them."" "
     'Look!' he said. `Can you see anything now?' 
"Chaddie Trorey,4017950434332,06-01-1993
"
"Layne Tomowicz,4041591055373287,30-11-1981
"
"beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it that the figure of "
made peace with  the peoples of Harad;  and the slaves of Mordor he released 
####-wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took Aragorn  out from the 
"screech  sent a shiver down Bilbo's back, though he  did not  yet understand "
"Sapphira Bowman,4037435305942234,22-06-1976
"
(and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would  question us above all 
they went on it broadened and got gradually shallower. At last the sky above  
"it is maybe I shall learn  in good time, or in bad time. By  root  and twig, "
and vapours of  the poisonous stream their  breath  became easier and  their 
     `Orophin  has  now  gone in haste  back  to our  dwellings  to warn our 
"the town openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the mountain, and laughed "
""
for  him to open  out. So far we have been given nothing  more to go on than 
"gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in "
"good  roads,  an  inn  or  two,  and  now  and  then  a  dwarf  or  a  farmer  ambling  by  on "
     'It was  in the very hour  that  Faramir was brought to the Tower  that 
walking 
foundered. Then all that was left unslain of  their cavalry  turned and fled 
with  a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To 
""
"     'Then you are going to fly,'  said Pippin.  'You  won't cut straight on "
cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.' 
"there.""  Now long shall I journey ere  I have  joy again. It is  I that must "
"Keith Vaughton,4628590079558,21-03-1996
"
""
"In the dark he fell over what he thought was a log, and he found it was the hobbit "
Gandalf. 'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They 
"pulled,  and  soon  the  raft  was  drawn  out  of  the  current  of  the  Forest  River  and "
"Dorris Munkley,4017950081687,17-03-1996
"
"will  keep it  safe;  he will do  lots of good, especially to nice  hobbits.  "
"Con Hinge,4041374429029756,21-03-1982
"
"out and pay for it! Dear me, what a fool I was and am!"" said the least Tookish part "
stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their horses up the ramp and 
"Beside it  a  broad white ladder stood, and   at  its foot three  Elves  were "
glanced upon Pippin's face?  
"     `Many indeed,' said Faramir, `and treachery not the least.' "
your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.' 
"     The ruffians had clubs in their  hands  and  horns by their  belts, but "
"out,  as it seemed  to them, upon a great field of  dark corn, tossed  by  a  "
entertainments  rolled  into one.  Practically  everybody  living  near  was 
"believed  to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the "
"Sorcha Eschalette,4041597717961070,12-02-1991
"
along 
"     There was plenty of everything left for Frodo.  And, of course, all the "
voice was hoarse. He was a kindly little soul. Indeed it was long before he had the 
"the  cold  and  the wind, with wolves  all  round  below waiting  for  you,  they  can  be "
"South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some  miles. It  "
"Linus Hocking,4017958019062571,25-10-1999
"
"     'Much must be risked in war,' said Denethor. 'Cair Andros is manned and  "
"     'That's right. We  aren't allowed to send by it  now, but they use  the "
"the younger of these two, Peregrin Took,  should remain. My heart is against "
""
"must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the "
"     Full memory flooded back, and Sam cried aloud: 'It wasn't a dream! Then "
else  they are  destroyed.  The Three are hidden still.  But that no  longer  
"and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.' "
"'What have I said? ' he cried. `What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called.  "
"     'Much,' said Gandalf. 'But first send for Jomer. Do I not guess rightly "
"     in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle; "
Batter and beat! Yammer and bleat! 
"Hedvig McTurlough,4041590593745,29-10-1986
"
Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair! ' 
"naught to cook, not even grass!' "
"under  the  weedy  pools were sliding  and  greasy  stones, and footing  was "
"languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I stand and look out on fine "
to Lurien.' Sam sighed and waved his  hand towards the heights of the  Ephel 
"should have ridden to  the fields long  ago, but other matters delay me. Yet "
"Rita Wadie,4017953597088312,06-02-1982
"
     Chapter 4   Treebeard  
 
friends and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay for it. That 
"it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It  "
could: they stared at us so threateningly. A good deal of the time  we spent 
     When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown; 
"Dunharrow. Here  was one of those old  images  brought to life, or  maybe  a "
"touched it in Isengard,  and  there I should have been quicker. But my  mind "
Gimli son of Gluin! ' 
 
 
"     in autumns that there were, "
"my own  will. That alone he will find hard to endure. And he beheld me. Yes,  "
"gates of Isengard  must stand, and  their hearts  were heavy; but their eyes "
"     'I thank you for your fair words,' said Aragorn, 'and  my heart desires "
"####-Bridge.  His task, according to the original plans  of the conspirators, was "
"looking ba ck, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper: "
"thrown open with a great clang, and out of it there came an embassy from the "
####-rocks  away  on the left four other  Riders came flying.  Two  rode  towards 
went down into  the hollow circle. In  the  midst of it there stood a single 
"fro  yelping  horribly.  Then  another  came  and  another,  one  in  blue  flames,  one  in "
"of  time  inside  goblin-tunnels.  Today's  Thursday,  and  it  was  Monday  night  or "
"dread she had,  and shared with me, in the days of Wormtongue and the king's "
"it, but they had to wait a long time; for the composition of The Lord of the "
"have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command ' "
"peaching sneakthief!' he yelled. 'You can't do  your job, and you can't even "
hinder our  crossing; and  afterwards  they  heard  my song. Now they bid me 
wonder? I cannot place you. You do not  seem to come in the old lists that I  
     They had been going for a  long while  -- Pippin had tried to keep count 
"beyond even your  accustomed folly. Still, I thank him, for it is plain that "
"Noell Skinley,4041374938011410,03-06-1979
"
"     `Who knows?  Smjagol doesn't  know,'  answered Gollum. 'You cannot reach "
"     All the  same  he had been lonely, and  never more so  than now at  the "
"Jessey Pywell,4017954448849209,13-07-1997
"
     Taking his axe the  Dwarf now  cut  several branches. These they lashed 
     Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side. Far 
"of offering  –  except  old Balin.  the  look-out man, who was  rather  fond  the hobbit. "
Sauron entered into Minas  Tirith; and thus  I  have  been delayed here. And 
"adventures. They discreetly disappeared, and  the  family hushed  it up; but  the  fact "
"hand, and in his heart keeping a debate. "
men that were left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze. 
"Rafi Blazejewski,4480558596409,02-10-1994
"
"their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank  "
son.' 
"     `Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried.  'He's been a bit "
"grew less, and the  shadow of the eastern bank faded back into the night . At "
"Abbot Millimoe,4041378546311,16-02-1979
"
tree  is  from  another of the  same  name  but  quite  different growth and 
"""This  is  the  Arkenstone  of  Thrain,""  said  Bilbo,  ""the  Heart  of  the  Mountain; "
the leaves. 
####- 
"the  way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop  curving away from the river, "
"Sabrina Erbain,4382495402305,26-02-1991
"
wood  was  filled  again  with  their  clamour  and  their  cries.  Bilbo  found  himself 
"from the defence of Minas Tirith. If  it  is not countered  swiftly,  I deem "
off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies 
"####-song.  Mellyrn  they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom, "
"close  to  the  ground,  was  as  smooth  and  upright  as  mason's  work,  but  without  a "
"and between the ends there  was a narrow gap: Carach Angren, the Isenmouthe, "
"Carney Bowbrick,4041371009978,10-03-1979
"
"     'Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!' said Pippin. "
"the ground,  the great bows of her legs quivering, as she  gather ed  herself "
"""Indeed I can!"" said the wizard. ""But share and share alike! You may find you "
March and did not know that  Frodo had  been ill. On the  thirteenth of that 
it comes I would have my friends beside me.' But of that day he would say no 
to go far.' 
They were taken by  surprise. You heard  that horn-blowing? Ev idently  there 
"mind the moon much, but it will give us a little light to steer by."" "
weather  he forgot his  troubles for a  while. The  Shire had seldom seen so 
so that others may keep them. But you are my  heir: all that I had and might  
tongue. 
now 
"     'Ar!' said the tracker. 'They've lost their  heads, that's what it  is.  "
"doorstep  till  they  thought  of  something.  And  sit  and  think  they  did,  or  wandered "
"get positively ""hasty"", as he would say. He let  out a great hoom-hom, and a  "
"     Last of all he came. His men passed in. The  mounted knights  returned, "
"     ' ""I have an urgent errand,"" he said. ""My news is evil."" Then he looked "
"many of their traditions, up to that time still  mainly oral, were collected "
people 
"hazes far  below. All about them were small woods of resinous trees, fir and "
"half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter  of fact, they were not very "
"     '""What about drink?"" I said to the Ents.  "
Out  they  went  under  the  overhanging  branches  of  the  trees  on  either  bank. 
"     The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stair. They "
"     And Aragorn hearing  him,  turned and  said: 'Verily, for  in the  high "
     They started  again  before   the day  was broad.  Not that most of  the 
"seemed to me so important.  I never liked the looks of the Young miller, but "
appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our names outside. 
     'Is there no deed to do?' she said. 'Who commands in this City?' 
"day,""  he  thought.  ""This  is  the  dreariest  and  dullest  part  of  all  this  wretched, "
"Shae Byne,4017955559877483,30-05-1975
"
####-     Then  having made up  his mind he acted swiftly; and catching up Pippin 
     And on the Hither Shore 
Caves of Aglarond be left behind.' 
"for  the stars went out. As if  a dark  veil had  been withdrawn, the Mirror  "
"Natal Fielding,4017958742510573,26-05-1983
"
"Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!' he cried. 'Heel, Wolf!'  To the relief of Frodo and "
Dol Amroth and the hardiest of the garrison stood at bay. Shot and dart fell 
"flowed  then in  a gully through the  midst of a wide  green  gore,  sloping "
"he  threw himself against it, but it did not  yield. Then not far inside, or "
"all the land. Their height  could not be  guessed,  but they stood up in the "
"Marybeth McCoole,4041378904409698,03-05-1993
"
midsummer  bonfire.  Outside  the  ring  of  dancing  warriors  with  spears  and  axes 
     now sawing in the middle. 
and  that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some 
"number."" "
"Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.' "
"Pietra Brumhead,4041370522799,14-01-1988
"
Nonetheless it cannot be doubted that when Denethor saw great forces arrayed 
reveal. Were  these people  all in league against him?  He  began to suspect 
"River, and right agin  the Old Forest. That's a dark bad place, if half  the "
"####-that.  But why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent  "
####-thought again of a test that might make the finding of  Gollum unneeded. The 
sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a  goat. All weariness seemed to have 
"Hill  and  over  the Hill, and across  the Water;  it was a great deal more  than a nine "
and  went off southwards into  the deep shadows that mantled all the western 
"     After  some  time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrow "
"     'I have been among them,' answered Aragorn. 'They are proud and wilful, "
throve  on  the  trade  that  came  up  the  great  river  from  the  South  and  was  carted 
But  somehow  he was  comforted.  It was  rather  splendid  to be wearing  a blade 
"Darb Corbally,4041595855321,28-12-1988
"
seems  likely enough.  Let us be thankful that they are  not hunting us: for  
"Nichole Holdworth,4236602477821210,12-11-2000
"
said Aragorn; 'for that way I now shall take. But I do  not go  gladly; only 
they left the land of Lurien. 
 
""
"     The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick "
the likes of Smaug. It may be a mercy and a blessing yet to know of the bare patch 
"     Now squeaking high, now purring low,  "
"     'I've  got to chance  it,' said  Sam. He  stepped to the  trap-door and "
"Cassandry Chevis,4041596189431,08-03-1985
"
"even was  my brother,  Boromir:  a  man of  prowess,  and for  that  he  was "
     We only wish 
"bowing their  heads  slightly, murmuring in  their  slow musical voices, and "
"Claudina MacRinn,4186221424792,27-02-1987
"
song that seemed fair to him;  yet  when he  tried to repeat it to Sam  only 
"their  hands were tall  spears of ash,  painted  shields were slung at their "
"interest to  him, from the felling of  the least tree to the  pranks of  the "
start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by  eight o'clock?' 
"Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree, it seemed.  But "
"many  strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think  "
"way and that so as to come  above the flames, wh ile  the upper branches were "
"Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.' "
horrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as 
"searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where "
"     By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,  "
"     It grew cold. As morning came the wind bega n to stir again,  but now it "
old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo's heart. 
"friendly clime, or of people that, after  being long ill and bedridden, wake "
"Gilbertina Minocchi,4017959565383,13-09-1981
"
"spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom been seen in this empty country, and the "
looked at it with a doubtful eye. 
Meneldor young and swift. And they passed over  Udyn and  Gorgoroth  and 
"     'I doubt  it not,' said the king.  'I have had  a  good  hill -pony made "
"""There  is  a dragon marked  in  red on  the Mountain,  said Balin,  ""but  it will be "
"leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a "
"story. I have no doubt  that Smjagol's grandmother was a matriarch,  a great "
"from the Harlond, and a great press of  his first  foes was between  him and "
####-the  end of the second day of their  march  from  the Cross-roads  that they 
     'What did you find? ' asked Frodo. 
"Ashen  Mountains stood  like  sombre grey  ghosts, behind  which  the  misty "
     `The words are in  the elven-tongue of the West of  Middle-earth in the 
"     'It certainly came,' said Frodo, `and that's the  chief thing.  But now "
It was quite a  long while before any of  them dared  to  turn  that comer. By  that 
sickly hue had left them. They  looked now as  if they were only very deeply  
"Maurie O'Meara,4041591516354314,08-12-1997
"
"Caye Burnsall,4388867900788650,05-05-1995
"
boughs! I never saw such eyes before.' 
"alone,  will  spring  upon a tower of horn and  hide that  stands above  its "
"     `I shall go to Minas Tirith,  alone if need be, for it is my duty,' said "
"had  passed  from  an  uneasy  dream  (in which  a warrior,  altogether  insignificant  in "
"the open, looking towards the profound  shadow of the wood, leaning forward, "
 
"The  dragon  swooped  once more  lower  than  ever,  and  as  he  turned  and  dived "
"journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us, we "
"strange  night more  than  a  year  ago;  and  they  followed him,  a little "
"Quite suddenly Dori, now at the back again carrying Bilbo, was grabbed from "
"thought  they were going to get Bag End,  that time when he went off and was "
grin. 
"Gently he stripped off Frodo's old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of "
"####-In a moment Gollum was on him. But before Bilbo could do anything, recover "
"     'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo. "
"paths, and  some were now following Treebeard. As they drew near the hobbits "
"looking over his garden and meadows beyond, sloping down to the river.  "
"had stood.  But either Gandalf was astray,  or  else the land had changed in "
"the shaft.  By both the doors they could now see that many bones were lying, "
instead  of  capturing  prisoners  and  devouring  people  waked  suddenly  from  their 
"using the  Common Speech of the West, in manner and tone like  to the speech "
"     'Can't you  stop your rabble  making such a racket, Shagrat? '  grunted "
"     Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked "
"Rheba Bartholomaus,4041370755343860,03-01-1989
"
"and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!' "
"too large for him, and he looked rather comic. What his father Bungo would have "
"     but better is Beer, if drink we lack, "
and all the blacker  since  orders came that lights are  to be dimmed within 
"and he said to him: 'Gimli Gluin's son, have you your axe ready?' "
"glade,  hunting  for  those  that  had  branches  fairly  low,  or  were  slender  enough  to "
"struck a narrow road, that  went rolling  up and down,  fading grey into the "
the 
Suddenly he knew  in  his heart that they were  silently commanding  him  to 
blanket.  
"forehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight, "
"the eyes  advanced. Frodo's hand wavered, and slowly the Phial drooped. Then "
"guess  that  the ""Chief"" will have a gang of ruffians handy.  We  had better  "
"squatted and listened  again. Then he stood up, as if to risk a sudden dash. "
     In  the  deepening  dusk  they came  down  into  the  valley. Here  the 
slaying those  of  their enemies who  threw  down  their  weapons. When  the 
vanished with a flash. Frodo  gave a cry - and Tom leaned forward and handed 
"there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, "
 
"the  Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There were the "
and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their feet. 'I think we are in 
It was  late in the afternoon  when the leaders came  to wide  grey thickets 
"down to Crickhollow together first, and resting there a bit. But now, seeing "
""
"important, and in the end I  had to be harsh. I put the fear of fire on him, "
"since  Entish  was  such  an 'unhasty'  language,  whether they had yet  got "
"ever see  the  old fellow again. He'll miss his chance of  I told'ee so, Sam: "
"for content. Treebeard's draughts may be nourishing,  but one feels the need "
####-<h4>Chapter 4.</h4> <br> Treebeard 
"had no clear idea  at all. Frodo  had not spoken much to him  of his errand, "
"that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows so much.' "
took no notice. 
"Wilt Lewcock,4017956974448,13-12-1996
"
looked taller than it was. Sam saw  now that it was less lofty than the high 
"terrible servants of Sauron.  They  crouched, listening.  The voices and the "
"lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire. "
""
"     'I know. But it is difficult to do both,' he objected. If I just vanish "
"Tiffy Doring,4041592294011,18-08-1992
"
"     There he stood, with his hat in his hand  and the wind in his hair, and "
"arms. I still hope for victory, but not by arms.  For into the midst  of all "
"caution.  They  spoke  aloud,  and  cried  out  to  one  another,  as  they  lifted  old "
"Sauron and his flight, lest he  should seek to return to his old realm.  But "
"Bobbye McCuthais,4041590805826,25-07-1980
"
it  is a  gathering of Ents  --  which does not often happen nowadays.  But I 
"     'Then you shall  have  it,' said Pippin.  'Will you have it here, or in "
     And cursed the faithless ship that bore 
"drink. There is one stream there, I know, black and strong which crosses the path. "
think the Road  will prove too  hard for  your courage. But  if  you  desire 
"had some part, still  I  would save you, and deliver you from the ruin  that "
"Karmen Timmins,4017955878054939,01-03-1989
"
"now what next, I  wonder? Maybe we shall soon  be sighing for good hard rock  "
"     I walk in the South, "
"""I  have  no  idea  at  the  moment  –  if  you  mean  about  removing  the  treasure. "
"where was their path, and where was there any food, and what were they going to "
"Austin Tremeer,4261134719065,21-05-1997
"
lying down he tried to comfort Frodo with his arms and body. Then sleep took  
"Englebert Petticrew,4041371041651140,28-04-1985
"
"     `Here it is. Don't  pinch, lad! I  won't  let you  go. Tread water  and "
"Kelsi Cutill,4017955058839,16-04-1994
"
     'I thought you were going to stop  at Helm's Deep!' said Pippin. 'Where 
"was only a burden, while everybody was making plans for  speed in a business "
     'What's wrong with the inn?' said Frodo. 'Tom Bombadil  recommended it. 
was  a  blade like a stabbing tongue of fire;  in its left  it held a whip of 
through many fathers from Isildur Elendil's son of  Minas  Ithil. He  is the 
"you put  it,  were you  and Frodo;  and  I was  the  only  one  that was not "
"night. If  they  escaped by some chance,  then they  must have hidden in the "
"     'He is in prison, but no worse,' said  Aragorn.  `He had suffered much. "
befallen; and when Jomer rode out from the forefront of his battle and stood 
""
"Fairlie Widdowes,4972558389892,26-10-1998
"
"well befit one of high race, if he sits in power and peace. But in desperate "
"down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under the stony bank, "
"seeking an answer, and the  horse that we lent him  came back riderless. What "
"All Hobbits were, in any case,  clannish and reckoned up their relationships "
and  as  he  went  both  the  king  and  Bard  saluted  him  with  honour.  As  they  passed 
"That  turned  the  conversation,  and  they  all  began  discussing  dragon-slayings "
"flash of  white fire, the  elf-horse  speeding as  if on wings, passed right "
"could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier  "
trees  and our  lives  are in  great  danger. That has not happened  in this 
"sounded  upon   the   tower  echoed  in  the  Deep  behind,  as   i f  armies "
"and I would have  her loved for her memory,  her ancientry, her  beauty, and  "
"was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley "
"it the shore rose sheer into a grey  cliff, and there was no further passage "
the reeds were rattling-on it went 
having such beautiful dreams. I dreamed I was walking in a forest rather like this 
     The hobbits  opened the barrier and stood aside.  'Thank you!' the  Men 
is not far  now;  and it is little further  from  there to  Mordor than from 
"     The  king was already there, and as soon as they  entered he called for  "
"####-hither,' said Legolas.  "
"the  hair  on  their heads was actually standing up,  waving and curling and "
"Kirsti Mannering,4864411791255280,12-02-1998
"
to the Stone of Erech!' 
"them  were  old  castles  with  an  evil  look,  as  if  they  had  been  built  by  wicked "
"Chilton Freschi,4041376519073297,06-09-1982
"
"     'As  for that,  who can tell?' answered Merry. 'But why, lord,  did you  "
bare. No mallorn lifted its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lurien. 
"way. That would  be the end  o' last year, after you left.  But it  had been "
"Rebekah Bourgeois,4017955469292732,06-08-1975
"
""
"expected, for the slope  was  far less steep on  this side, and before  long "
Then they laid the bier upon a great wain with  Riders of Rohan all about it 
"two; but his  long  white  hair, his  sweeping silver beard, and  his  broad "
"     Shelob was  gone; and  whether she lay  long in her  lair, nursing  her  "
"     'I  saw  him there,' answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered "
"and soap. Get inside, and be quick!' "
and the glow of the trees faded; but outside  under  the arch they could see 
trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! ' 
missing 
     Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?  
flanks. As they drew near the flash and flicker of their eyes could be seen. 
did in the case of the trolls at the beginning of their adventures before they had any 
falling to the ground. 
third day and  struck  west.  Few  can foresee whither their road  will lead 
"     'This is no journey for  such steeds  as  Stybba,  as I have told you ' "
"you go!  And quick,  before I knock a few more heads off, to  put some sense "
hobbits  regretted  very much that  they  knew so little  about them: only a  
of the Misty Mountains were  scattered or  destroyed  in the Battle  of Five 
neighbourhood.  People  became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off  the 
"Clarine Hoy,4041594200152606,26-08-1986
"
"cries  and  horn-calls. Doom,  doom:  the pillars seemed  to tremble and the "
"rope-length would give out while he was still high up, but there was still a  "
     'Ar! Who says there isn't?' 
     'I  don't like the look of that! ' said Sam.  `So  this secret  way  of 
"Merry McAless,4017951753356812,12-01-1988
"
"were before my gates, maybe your deeds would be remembered by the "
"is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch the one that is to be "
"many days  in  Ithilien. For the Field of Cormallen, where the host was  now "
     For the seat of a troll don't feel it. 
"Emily Antyshev,4041596895445609,28-12-2001
"
connected 
the  shores  of  the  lake  and  as  far northward  towards  the Mountains  as  they would 
remind me of?' 
     The ruffian laughed. 'Lotho! He knows all right. Don't you worry. He'll 
     Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some corner or  
"out and  came  back westward, as far as the Great River. But  then he turned "
"proper, as you might say: not to my feeling anyhow, meaning no disrespect to "
"were the spiny  thickets that the  hobbits could  walk upright  under  them, "
"     Suddenly he  stopped  and  stammered,  overcome  with surprise  to hear  "
"Glyn Wrenn,4041370786287,25-11-1989
"
"Derril McSpirron,4041593531395,24-08-1985
"
them.  `Here! We can get down here. Smjagol went  this way once: I went this 
"meads  of  Morgul, but a foul  reek,  as if filth  unnameable were piled and "
"sight of the sun and the feel of the wind, sank back into his toes: there was no food "
"Gwenore Polley,4017952437739,07-04-1987
"
Orcs  with their burden  had  passed inside. Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing 
"     'The  Men of Gondor are valiant, and they  will never  submit; but they "
     'You  mean the Riders? I feared  that  they were servants of the Enemy. 
can't  jump  waterfalls. He's got no gear. So he's  got  to get back to  the 
"Laurene O'Halleghane,4541607089470827,26-07-1984
"
"some half-forgotten time when he had still  been a hobbit,  a  light-hearted "
"     He went on  with his tea.  The knock was repeated,  much louder, but he "
"kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by  the  soldiery  of  the "
"     It was still fairly early  by the sun, something between  nine and ten, "
"####-hair  on  his  toes  never  fall  out!  all  praise  to  his  wine  and  ale!-""  He  paused  for "
"have done, and this I have read: "
     beyond the world were visions showed 
"errantry: for  they rode often far  afield with the  Rangers  of  the North, "
"""Very  well,""  said  Bilbo,  who  was  anxious  to  agree,  until  he  found  out  more "
"through him and clutching  at his heart;  there was  a deadly cold, like the "
"     In the  morning, as they were  beginning  to  pack their slender goods,  "
"     'Towards  danger; but not  too  rashly, nor too straight,' answered the "
"This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses. "
was seen by many watchful eyes.  
"purposes were  made  void; a  land defiled,  diseased beyond  all healing -- "
"""Bard  is  not  lost!""  he  cried.  ""He  dived  from  Esgaroth,  when  the  enemy  was "
ring in the Halfling's hand; but Isildur perished ere this  age of the world 
the place  where he had slept. Shadowfax  stood there  already. Slinging the  
"about their  ways in a month, and yet after  a hundred  years they can still "
"Legolas  went with them, for this  was to be their last night in Lothlurien, "
""
"After that the Company kept a sharp look -out, but they saw no more of Gollum "
"funny things going  on today. Of course, we do get queer folk  wandering  in  "
flowing?' said Imrahil. 
was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that 
them on. 
that shall ever be again. For by you  he  was saved from the fire. Go now! I 
Gollum was talking to himself. Smjagol was holding a  debate with some other 
"     'Then  come, and let your  brother go with us,  and some other of  your "
"Davide Wimmer,4041593809061051,15-03-2001
"
"smiled. `Do not let your hearts be troubled,' she said. 'Tonight  you  shall "
"They  searched  about,  and  soon  found  the  marks  of  trolls'  stony  boots  going "
"and he grovelled  on the ground. He said he was Grnma, friend and counsellor  "
"""Indeed!"" said they, ""and what may be your business?""  "
of his eyes. He went  to  the opening and  there pale and faint was a  thin new moon 
"     'I think all  will  be well  now,' answered  Gandalf. 'He was  not held "
word is blurred and burned; probably room -- we slew many in the bright -- I  
"     'Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, "
"was  an echo in deep caves far away. No other sound they heard, and yet they "
"long or more, and the breach in it is wide.' "
riding home in the morning? ' 
"     `But  how are we  to get down there, even  if  you have cut through the "
"Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows, and there he shall lie for ever among the "
"you  visit  us  again,  when  our  halls  are  made  fair  once  more,  then  the  feast  shall "
"the Beornings,  and  that  is great praise,  for the Beornings  are the best "
"hardened him.  He found himself stiffening,  as if for a final spring; he no "
"food;  in  there  the wild  things are dark, queer, and savage. I will provide you with "
"     In  the early night  Frodo woke from deep  sleep, suddenly, as if  some "
"him, in the hope that he may find it.' "
"son of Jomund, the choice must be made at last. Aid us,  or at the worst let "
"     'I  can add some more, if  you like it,' said Sam. 'Calling your  Chief "
"the foreshadow  of  1939 had yet become a threat of inevitable disaster, and "
     'Feet!' said Gimli. 'But we cannot eat them as well  as walk on  them ' 
"Karalee Janosevic,4041592878859759,28-03-1989
"
"of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.' "
####- 
"counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words  seemed so wise and fair, "
they 
"Othello Walkden,4041371075656643,24-10-1980
"
and they could  dimly perceive the roofs of the forest they   had left behind 
